Humanity wins.
Dear Austrians! Dear Austrians!The history of Austria is one of the rise of hard-working women and men. And it is a story of solidarity, of looking out for one another – where everyone should have a good life. That is what defines us, that is what makes us strong. When I think of this human Austria, “the ice melts from my soul”, as Rainhard Fendrich would say. I want to defend and strengthen this Austria. Unfortunately, the ÖVP and FPÖ have destroyed many social achievements in one and a half years. Employees, single parents, poor families and apprentices are the ones who suffer from their policies. These two parties pursue an elbow policy: everyone looks out for themselves. Anyone who stays behind is out of luck. Austria deserves better. The Ibiza coalition has failed because of itself. Now is the chance to put cohesion, solidarity and justice back at the centre. We have accomplished a lot in the last few months! From the glyphosate ban, the legal right to a daddy month, the end of millions in donations to political parties and full maternity leave: we are the force that makes Austria better, more livable and more socially just. During my tour through the federal states, I got to know women and men in a wide variety of life situations, had many conversations and took away concrete concerns for my political work. Bruno Kreisky once said that you have to like people if you are involved in politics. And he was absolutely right. As chairwoman of the SPÖ, I always care about the people. I make politics for them! I am indebted to them – not to a fortune of millions or to a major donor. This is what distinguishes the SPÖ from other parties. I have clear ideas about how I want to shape Austria. Everyone should be able to live freely. Everyone should find a good job that is fairly paid. Everyone should have the security of knowing that they will be supported if things go wrong. Anyone who needs care or support at home must get it. We will tackle the climate crisis at its primary cause: CO2 emissions. Health and housing must not become luxuries. And our children should have the same opportunities for education and good development - no matter what their name is, where they live and where they come from. How is all this supposed to work? You hold the plan in your hands! Here are our concepts to create a good life for all and a humane Austria.Dr. in Pamela Rendi-Wagner SPÖ Federal Party ChairwomanTo: Social Democratic Party of AustriaMany people turn to us every day. They write to us about their problems, their criticism, their suggestions – they write to us about what moves them. On the following pages we have repeatedly printed news from them. We hope that the answers in this program will meet your needs. We listen. Because our politics must have exactly one goal: to help the people in Austria.By: Gerhard H. In the current situation, there is no real glimmer of a future. The struggle for power between the individual parties, including in parliament, has been going on for almost 20 years now and is becoming increasingly inhumane. Politicians who bear responsibility should actually be role models for people and especially for young people.For the love of Austria The mission: Our Earth 11 Our climate 13 For the sake of the environment, animals and agriculture 17 What makes Austria strong: Our welfare state 21 Health! 27 Nothing is more important: healthy children 32 The best care for grandma and grandpa 35 We love the country and our regions 39 Proud of our business location 45 A home for everyone to fall in love with 49 No bought politics 53 Safe and free in Austria 57 Integration before immigration 61 Austria as a cultural nation 65 Defending press freedom 69For the love of Austria The mission: Our earth 11 Our climate 13 For the sake of the environment, animals and agriculture 17 What makes Austria strong: Our welfare state 21 Health! 27 Nothing is more important: healthy children 32 The best care for grandma and grandpa 35 We love the country and our regions 39 Proud of our business location 45 A home for everyone to fall in love with 49 No bought politics 53 Safe and free in Austria 57 Integration before immigration 61 Austria as a cultural nation 65 Defending press freedom 69 Hope for our children Model country in education 117 Land of opportunity 123 Learning for life 127 Abolish child poverty 130 People with disabilities 135 How young people live 137 Humanity wins. Even in digitalization 139 The Internet and new media 144 Free, equal, fair, solidary and diverse 149 Neutrality requires an active foreign policy 153 Europe, because many things can only be achieved together 159 The Marcel Hirschers of tomorrow 161 And this is how we finance it 162 For the love of AustriaWe love Austria not only because it is beautiful. We love Austria because it sticks together. Because we care about how our neighbors are doing. Because we don’t just watch when someone falls, we reach out and help them up. Because we know that a helping hand at the right moment can move mountains. Because justice is more important to us than our personal advantage. Because we don’t just stand by and watch others being bullied, we stand by their side. Because we know that every person has the right to a beautiful, good life. Because we work to live, not live to work. And because everyone must have the chance to be happy. Austria is built on these ideas – on these values. That's what this program is about. We want to build on these values. We want to change society. We want the world to become fairer. We want everyone in Austria to find their personal happiness. And we want our children to have the chance to find happiness too. Out of love for Austria.
With this program for the 2019 National Council elections.
The mission: Our Earth.
Because the climate knows no parties.
While we used to be able to enjoy a sunny day, today it almost seems like a threat.
The weather reminds us that we are in the midst of a major crisis: the climate crisis.
We live in extraordinary times. We need extraordinary solutions.
Climate protection concerns us all. Because the climate affects our daily lives in many areas: from transport to work, from living to traveling, from what we grow to what we throw away.
We need measures that cover all areas of life.
Saving the climate can only be done together.
We need everyone involved to work together.
Only if we all work together across party lines do we have a chance for real change.
National solidarity - Austria-wide climate convention:
The climate issue is too important to be lost in party political bickering.
Yes, parties have different ideas and concepts for combating climate change.
But a good idea must not be abandoned just because another party put it forward.
That is why we want to convene an Austria-wide climate convention as a first step - regardless of the election - this year, before a new government is in place.
Not only all parties represented in parliament, but also the federal states and municipalities should participate.
Employee and employer representatives, environmental and animal protection organizations, experts and representatives of universities and research institutions, innovative companies and, of course, NGOs and representatives of movements such as “Fridays for Future” should also be able to get involved.
Within the framework of this convention, the best ideas - regardless of who they come from - are to be translated into concrete measures for climate protection in Austria.
Establishment of a climate protection fund instead of billions in fines:
One thing is clear: climate protection measures such as those we want to discuss at the Climate Convention often cost money.
Calculations by the Ministry of the Environment assume CO2 fines of 6.6 billion euros for the period from 2021 to 2030 if effective measures to save CO2 are not taken in a timely manner.
Doesn’t it make more sense to invest in climate protection today than to pay billions in senseless fines a few years later?
We think: YES!
That is why we want to launch a climate protection fund within the framework of the Convention.
This fund is intended to finance all measures decided at the national climate convention.
Creation of a climate research cluster:
We must respond to the climate catastrophe with innovation.
We drive this innovation forward through targeted research.
With a research cluster and a top-equipped center for climate research, one thing is clear: we have recognized the signs and dangers of the times and will do everything in our power to give our children a good future on this planet.
This also offers first-class opportunities for our research-intensive economy.
For the love of our climate and our planet
It's five to twelve.
We are in a climate crisis.
The causes: humans and their CO2 emissions.
The last 4 years were the 4 warmest years since temperature records began.
There is no turnaround in sight for 2019.
Because we want to save our planet, the climate and thus ourselves, we will initiate precisely this trend reversal.
We want a climate ticket for all of Austria, a Green New Deal that makes the economy more environmentally friendly, and a greening of our tax system.
The emission of CO2 itself is nothing new for our planet.
There have always been natural causes for this.
Green plants absorb CO2 and release oxygen.
This cycle has worked well for millions of years.
But the fact that this exchange has become unbalanced is man's fault.
The main reason is the combustion of coal, oil and gas. Not only conventional combustion engines in vehicles, but also power plants, households and industry emit tons of CO2.
Records show that since the 1950s, resource consumption has increased exponentially.
The world’s population, especially in urban areas, is growing.
The economy, transport, water consumption, fertilizer use, international tourism and energy consumption are also growing.
This results, among other things, in increased emissions of CO2 into the atmosphere.
The consequences: natural disasters are increasing in number, extent and impact.
This results in global costs of several hundred billion euros - annually.
90 companies are…
responsible for 63 percent of global CO2 emissions.
The companies all come from the oil, gas and coal production sectors.
“The house is burning. We must stop the emission of greenhouse gases.” – Greta Thunberg
Entire areas of land – habitat for humans and animals – are under water.
In Greenland alone, the consequences are dramatic: in June 2019, 2 billion (!) tons of ice melted away there – in a single day.
More and more people are fleeing because of this – and the trend is increasing.
The extinction of species is increasing in pace.
And in Austria?
In Austria, more people now die from heat-related illnesses than in traffic accidents.
Farmers complain about poor harvests.
People who work outdoors suffer from the blazing sun.
Elderly people, parents of small children and pregnant women cannot leave their apartments and houses because the heat endangers their health.
That is why Austrian politicians must act – immediately.
We must reduce our CO2 emissions.
Industry must also make its contribution.
The production and trading of products must become more climate-friendly.
Public transport must be expanded and made cheaper!
Our vision: Austria will become CO2 neutral!
Good for the climate, good for us humans!
Less CO2 emissions in Austria and Europe, that is the goal!
Because we and our children should not be afraid of the future when it comes to our climate.
We can and will turn things around!
In order for Austria to be CO2-neutral by 2030 at the latest, the economy must make its contribution, jobs must become more environmentally friendly, public transport must be affordable for everyone and CO2 emissions must be taxed across Europe.
We also need to do more internationally: As a member of the United Nations, Austria helped adopt the 2030 Agenda with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals.
The agenda is a compass for the world.
It shows how we can develop so that a good life is possible for everyone.
Global CO2 emissions
Emissions in billion tonnes. Source: Global Carbon Project 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2017
This is how we do it.
A Green New Deal for Austria:
Essentially, climate policy is about moving away from small, individual strategies and instead reorienting entire industries, transport routes and jobs in an ecological way.
This should work with investments: expanding public transport routes;
Convert residential and industrial buildings to be energy efficient;
“Eco-upgrades” for companies to help them emit fewer greenhouse gases.
In addition, climate-friendly jobs should be promoted.
Re-qualification initiatives should be launched immediately for employees in those economic sectors that are currently dependent on fossil fuels so that a fair transition to a clean, sustainable economic system is possible for employees.
The 1-2-3 climate ticket for Austria:
In Vorarlberg and Vienna you can travel on public transport with an annual ticket for one euro per day.
This should be available for the whole of Austria for rail and local transport: for 3 euros a day throughout Austria, for 2 euros a day through 3 federal states and for 1 euro a day for public transport within the federal state.
The whole thing will be financed from the Climate Protection Fund.
In addition, we want to expand public transport in general and alternative modes of transport such as regional shared taxis and improve the framework conditions for cycling and walking.
Electrification of railway lines:
In Austria, diesel locomotives are still in use on many railway lines.
The level of electrification is currently only around 73%.
The electrification of railway lines throughout Austria could save hundreds of thousands of tons of CO2 over the next few years.
That is why we want a special investment program amounting to around 200 million euros annually for the next six years.
This would enable us to save 210,000 tonnes of CO2 annually.
At the same time, this would create jobs.
Local transport pact for municipalities:
Often, switching from car to train fails because of the so-called last mile, i.e. because there is a reasonably reasonable train connection to the workplace nearby, but no reasonable connection from the house or apartment to the train station.
That is why we want to invest in a local transport package for communities.
Shared taxis, shuttle services or e-bikes at train stations are intended to offer a sensible alternative to the car and encourage people to switch to rail.
( --> 7-point plan for rural areas, p. 41)
Commuter allowance with climate bonus:
In the future, commuters will receive a climate bonus if they use the opportunity to travel to work by public transport and voluntarily forgo their car.
The commuter allowance should also be made fairer.
High incomes (for the same distance travelled) should not, as before, receive higher subsidies than low incomes.
This is unfair and should therefore be changed.
If we succeed in getting just 200,000 Austrians to switch to public transport through a combination of the 1-2-3 ticket and the climate bonus, we can save around 350,000 tonnes of CO2.
An EU-wide CO2 tax and kerosene tax:
Almost 45% of Austria’s CO2 emissions come from heavy industry and electricity producers.
These plants are included in the EU-wide emissions trading system.
There they currently pay around 25 euros per certificate or per tonne of CO2.
This EU-wide trading system functions only moderately well.
Because of the economic crisis, the CO2 price was very low for a long time.
In addition, it is subject to strong economic fluctuations.
Nobody knows what the price will be in 3-5 years.
A CO2 tax instead of emissions trading would provide planning security and would thus be a better investment basis for the economy.
The steering effect of CO2 pricing could be significantly increased by a CO2 tax.
To ensure that a higher CO2 price for heavy industry does not lead to the relocation of production and jobs, we are calling for a CO2 border adjustment (CO2 tariff).
100 percent renewable electricity:
We want all electricity to come from renewable energy by 2030.
To do this, we need to restructure the green electricity subsidies.
They must become more efficient and climate-friendly.
For us, the focus is on raw material-independent forms of generation such as wind, water and sun.
The Euratom Treaty is to be converted into a nuclear phase-out treaty.
Climate-friendly laws:
All future laws must identify their impact on the climate.
If a law means more emissions, compensating countermeasures must be taken.
Making Austria an energy saving champion:
The Energy Efficiency Act is to be extended beyond 2020.
Companies with 20 or more employees should carry out energy checks, the results of which are publicly available.
There should be support for medium-sized companies.
More know-how transfer for communities on how they can save CO2 at their level.
There are many possibilities, whether it concerns street lighting, heat supply or vehicle fleets!
We want to train energy consultants so that households can become more energy efficient.
Similar to the 20,000 campaign, job seekers are to be qualified for this profession.
They can carry out heating checks, offer energy advice and issue energy certificates.
Climate education:
Climate protection should be an integral part of the education system right from the start.
The existing teaching principle “environmental education for sustainable development” should be explicitly expanded to include “climate education” and defined as an overarching theme in the general educational objective.
Teachers need to be trained and further educated.
100 million for Green Climate Funds:
In the Paris Climate Agreement, wealthy countries agreed to finance climate protection measures in the world's economically disadvantaged countries.
The “Green Climate Fund” was created for this purpose.
Austria has also committed to financing, but it remains to be seen whether an appropriate contribution will be made.
We want Austria to contribute 100 million euros.
Funding for companies with climate innovations:
In Austria, the cooperation between the public sector and companies has more than proven its worth.
Thanks to instruments such as the research premium, Austria is an extremely lucrative research country.
We want to use this advantage and expand it further.
Companies that conduct climate-relevant research should receive higher funding in the future.
Out of love for the environment, animals and agriculture
There are many good reasons to support environmental and animal protection.
Because we love Austria's nature, the good cuisine and its specialties.
Because we want to prevent animal suffering.
And also because we want to pass on an intact and livable environment to our children and grandchildren.
You should be able to enjoy healthy, locally grown food!
And for that we need good agriculture.
When it comes to food, we have a clear idea of ​​where we want to go: more organic, more variety, no pesticides – and ultimately: no food waste.
We want an environmental and agricultural policy that is geared to the needs of nature and people, that supports farms and reduces animal suffering.
What we do not want is a policy that implements the wish list of agricultural corporations.
Because the profits of a few come at the expense of our environment and at the expense of us as consumers.
We will ensure that our children and future generations will find an intact environment, a functioning ecosystem and high-quality food.
And that includes banning plant poisons and other pesticides.
Because they endanger biodiversity, including bees and birds.
Without bees there is no prosperity – no harvests and no food.
That is why it was so important for the SPÖ to ensure the ban on glyphosate.
Glyphosate and pesticides ultimately harm us humans: they end up in our bodies via food.
We want to promote organic farming.
Because it protects the environment!
But it’s about more than just avoiding chemicals and pesticides.
Organic farms ensure that resources are used sparingly and that plants and animals are cared for naturally and in a species-appropriate manner.
More organic farming means: protection of water quality, good soil quality, biodiversity and fewer CO2 emissions.
But even beyond cultivation and animal husbandry issues, there is still plenty to do!
Millions of animals are transported across Europe every year.
This causes animal suffering and also pollutes the environment because mass transport takes place by road.
Limiting animal transport helps animal welfare and contributes to less road traffic and less climate impact.
If we want to combat the climate crisis, we must also address food waste.
In Austria we throw away 577,000 tons of food and leftovers every year.
Discarded food causes CO2 because it has to be processed as waste.
Every kilogram of food thrown away causes 4.5 kilograms of CO2 emissions.
Food waste is the third largest cause of global warming after the USA and China.
Within the EU, the production and disposal of food waste causes 170 million tonnes of CO2.
Our vision: Austrian agriculture without pesticides, with species-appropriate animal husbandry and diversity in cultivation.
We want an environmental and agricultural policy that is geared to the needs of consumers, nature and animals – and that supports farms.
Pesticides, animal suffering and food waste should be a thing of the past.
We want to pass on an intact and livable environment to our children and grandchildren.
You should be able to enjoy healthy, regionally grown food!
Glyphosate is the most widely used pesticide in the world. Residues are found in the environment and in food. In March 2015, glyphosate was classified as probably carcinogenic to humans by the WHO's International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). In July 2019, Parliament accepted the SPÖ’s proposal: the sale of glyphosate is now banned in Austria.
This is how we do it.
We want to support the transition to organic farming:
The goal is to achieve 50 percent organic farming and livestock farming.
We will also campaign for more support for organic farming at EU level.
Reducing pesticides and mineral nitrogen fertilization.
Prohibition of the use of substances that endanger bees, including glyphosate, chlorpyrifos and neonicotinoids.
Use of federal funds in the agricultural chambers with the aim of advising on the avoidance of pesticides and glyphosate and promoting organic farming.
Promoting regionality and organic farming in the procurement of food.
More information and raising awareness among consumers regarding the value of high-quality, healthy local organic food.
Future agricultural support programs should focus on sustainable management.
We reject the Mercosur agreement because it would lead to more cheap meat in Austria and harm farmers.
We will create an animal transport reduction plan:
Within five years, such transports are to be significantly reduced, both within the country and from Austria to other countries.
We also want to support regional marketing.
If transport is necessary, animal welfare must be taken into account.
No food waste:
Following the example of France and the Czech Republic, we want food that can no longer be sold to be passed on to social institutions.
Investments will also be made in the necessary infrastructure.
We want to develop measures to prevent food waste and lay them down in law in the Waste Management Act.
This also helps the climate. Food waste is the third biggest climate sinner after the USA and China and is responsible for 3.3 gigatons of CO2 emissions worldwide.
In Austria, more than 577,000 tonnes of avoidable food waste are generated every year.
Close data gaps.
There is currently insufficient information on how much food waste is generated in the food wholesale trade.
This must change!
Love what makes Austria strong: our welfare state
Austria is a special country. Anyone who can grow up and live here is very lucky.
But we don’t just love Austria because of its nature, culinary specialties or clean water – we also love it because it offers us security.
And that is only possible with a strong welfare state.
He ensures that we are not abandoned when we are feeling bad or have special needs.
If we lose our jobs,
when a baby is on the way,
the partner becomes seriously ill
or if the parents need care: then we are covered.
Because we look out for each other.
And because there are social and health services.
It is our welfare state that makes Austria such a great place to live.
Many people look enviously at Austria when it comes to social benefits and health care.
Anyone expecting a child in Switzerland must work until the birth.
Anyone who retires in Germany receives much less pension for the same income than in Austria.
If you lose your job in Italy, you get about half your old salary for seven months, then nothing.
Unemployed people in Great Britain only receive a fixed amount of between 300 and 400 euros.
Austria is a role model when it comes to pensions.
Average pension of a man upon retirement in 2016.
A strong welfare state also includes social housing.
Vienna is considered an international model example: 3 out of 5 Viennese people live in subsidized apartments.
There, rents are lower and contracts are permanent.
This also dampens rental prices on the free market – and that is important because rents are rising rapidly.
A welfare state that invests in housing prevents rents from exploding.
What many people don’t know is that a strong welfare state is a positive location factor!
It stabilizes consumption, makes planning easier for companies and makes the location crisis-proof.
Because those who are insured work better.
And if there are social benefits that protect against poverty, people can continue to consume.
If consumption remains stable, it means more security for producers and investors. (Source: WIFO study from 2018)
In Austria, it is important to us that no one has to live in fear of the future.
And it should stay that way.
We want all people in Austria to continue to live happily and well in our country.
Our vision: Strengthen the welfare state – and thus the people who need it
A country worth living in is one in which the strong take care of the weaker.
A country where we catch people when they fall – and help them up again.
That is why we will stand in the way of any attack on the welfare state.
We defend it because the Austrian people need it.
But not only that: we want to improve our welfare state.
We want to make our health system even better,
Prevent child poverty,
Better protect pensions and social benefits.
All this makes people stronger.
What is a national objective?
A national objective stipulates that a country should achieve a very specific goal. These objectives are enshrined in the constitution. However, since a state objective does not yet define how the objective will be achieved, there are additional concrete laws. They show the exact route.
This is how we do it.
Securing the welfare state in the constitution
With the national goal of a “welfare state” we can prevent attacks on vacation entitlements, pensions, health benefits and more in the long term.
ÖVP, FPÖ and Neos only want to anchor economic interests in the constitution – but we want to see the welfare state secured.
Fundamental social rights in the constitution
The EU has a Charter of Fundamental Rights.
We want this for social rights in Austria!
We want a right to work: This means good working conditions, holidays, fair wages and working hours should be guaranteed in the constitution.
We are committed to the model of Austrian social partnership and effective representation of the interests of employees through strong trade unions and statutory membership in the Chamber of Labor.
Self-government must be strengthened, not weakened, in the interests of the people.
Pension guarantee
The comparison with Germany shows that only a good public pension system with contributions (pay-as-you-go system) ensures a pension that one can live on.
We want to guarantee this for future generations as well: pension levels must be constitutionally protected.
In this way, we prevent acquired credits in the pension account from being subsequently reduced.
Ban age discrimination
Discrimination against older people occurs primarily in private contractual relationships.
For example, older people are often no longer able to get loans and their accounts are not allowed to be overdrawn.
Older people often also have to pay insurance surcharges.
That's unfair.
We therefore want to enshrine the ban on discrimination on the basis of age in the Austrian Federal Constitution.
The Equal Treatment Act must be extended to all areas of life and the Equal Treatment Ombudsman must be strengthened.
The ÖVP and FPÖ have weakened our welfare state.
Many people have suffered under the Ibiza coalition:
Work longer:
Because of Kurz and Strache, employees have to work up to 60 hours a week – and lose out on overtime pay.
Less minimum income:
The ÖVP and FPÖ have radically cut minimum security for families.
70,000 children will feel the cuts.
For the 3rd child in the family there is only 1.50 euros per day.
No emergency aid:
In Austria, emergency aid is the last lifeline against poverty.
The ÖVP and FPÖ are planning to abolish emergency aid as we know it.
Cuts at the AMS:
The ÖVP and FPÖ have withdrawn up to a third of the annual budget from the AMS – which also means less advice, less help with integration into the labour market.
Less help for older unemployed people:
One of the first attacks on job seekers was the discontinuation of the 20,000 campaign.
It would have created jobs for 20,000 men and women over the past 50 years, giving them hope and valuable workers to their communities.
More wage pressure:
The expansion of the list of shortage occupations threatens to lead to more competition on the labor market – and consequently more wage pressure.
More deductibles:
Due to the complete restructuring of social insurance, patients face higher deductibles and poorer medical care.
In the important committees, employee representatives were replaced by business representatives.
Standing up for one another. Out of love for Austria.
Health! Austria must become the country with the highest life expectancy.
What we eat, whether we quit smoking or exercise – all of this is important for our health.
But what home we are born into is much more important: poverty costs years of life.
Anyone who loves people cannot accept this: everyone must work and live in such a way that he or she can live a long and healthy life.
And everyone must receive top-notch medical care.
Austria should become the country with the highest life expectancy in health
– without social differences.
As a rich country, we must ensure that everyone lives as healthily as possible.
And that everyone receives the best possible medical care when they become ill - in the city or in the country, young or old, with a high or low income.
Only if we achieve this will we truly be a rich country.
Austria has a good public health system – and it should get even better.
In ten years, Austria should be seen as a role model at every health congress in the world: as the country with the highest life expectancy – because neither poverty nor unequal medical care cost people years of life.
Because good living conditions and the best medical care enable everyone to live a long, healthy life.
And because we finance healthcare in solidarity instead of surrendering it to profit interests.
Don’t wait any longer: first-class medicine for everyone.
Long waiting times at statutory health insurance doctors deter people from visiting the doctor, which might have been important.
Those who can afford it opt ​​for a doctor of their own choice: because those who pay receive longer treatment and spend less time in the waiting room.
Over the last ten years, the population in Austria has grown, but the number of general practitioners has decreased in many regions.
General practitioner positions in rural areas often remain vacant for long periods.
Travel distances and waiting times are getting longer.
By 2030, the problem will become even more serious: by then, two-thirds of general practitioners will have reached retirement age.
By 2030, two-thirds of general practitioners will have reached retirement age.
At the same time, studies show how important it is to have good access to family doctors: ten more family doctors per 100,000 inhabitants increase life expectancy by 50 days.
We need a family doctor offensive.
This is how we do it.
Appointment guarantee and health hotline
With the new appointment guarantee model, we want to eliminate long waiting times.
Waiting time limits are planned for appointments with general practitioners, specialists, in the hospital outpatient clinic and in a medical institution.
A distinction is made between acute cases (acute flu or burning rash) and planned cases (check-ups or referrals).
The health hotline 1450, which will be rolled out throughout Austria by the end of this year, is to be further developed into a real appointment booking service.
Anyone who contacts the hotline with a health question will receive qualified information about which level of care they should contact.
At the same time, an appointment is made within a specified short period of time.
This also saves long waiting times at the doctor’s office or in the outpatient clinic. Patients are no longer sent in circles and end up directly at the level of care that is best and most suitable for them.
Germany, Denmark and Switzerland already operate such systems successfully.
More doctors and health professionals in the health insurance system
Austria is facing an acute shortage of doctors.
In the next ten years, every second practicing physician will retire – that is almost 8,800 doctors.
The situation is even more dramatic for the approximately 7,100 doctors with a GKK contract and for specialists.
The consequences are communities without family doctors, long waiting times, weeks and often months of waiting for specialist appointments and high costs for private doctors.
The ones who suffer from this development are the patients.
Around 200,000 people currently do not have adequate primary care close to their home because 85 health insurance positions cannot currently be filled.
We want to continue to ensure high-quality, local and patient-friendly medical care for Austria in the future.
For more family doctors
The first point of contact for health problems is your family doctor.
The primary care sector must therefore be strengthened and expanded to ensure that low-threshold, local care is available throughout Austria in the future.
In our view, this requires:
Incentives for medical students and doctors to stay in the country and become general practitioners:
a scholarship system for doctors that binds them to Austria for five years.
However, this also means having to accept positions with health insurance companies (one year of training costs around 60,000 euros).
→ without a scholarship: obligation to accept a contract doctor position after completing the training and in return easier admission to medical school (credited towards the aptitude test)
Priority in the allocation of training places, expansion of chairs for general medicine at all public universities,
increased focus on paid internships
More money for general practitioners: New, performance-based and contemporary fee agreements must be concluded.
State funding with a focus on underserved regions:
States should provide incentives to doctors to settle in their state – for at least five years – through subsidies, for example by making practice rooms available or by making transfers easier.
Start-up service based on the Viennese model: The funding for setting up a practice is an important step to motivate young doctors to set up their own practice, especially in the fields of general medicine and pediatrics, where an acute shortage of doctors is already noticeable.
In Vienna, general practitioners who settle in the 10th district of Vienna receive start-up capital of 44,000 euros.
Pediatricians can also count on this support – even throughout Vienna.
Elimination of VAT hurdles when renting medical practices
Promoting the expansion of primary care units (PVE):
By 2021, at least 75 primary care units are to be built throughout Austria.
200 million euros were made available for this purpose.
These need to be activated by the states and social insurance.
PVE offer the possibility of networking, cooperation with other health professions, less bureaucracy for the individual, shared staff, more flexible working hours, but also better opening hours - especially at off-peak times and on weekends - and thus better care.
Opening of the PVE to other specialists in the affected region who are in short supply
Health professions
In addition to the shortage of doctors, there will also be a shortage of staff in other health professions in the future.
From the health and nursing staff to the various therapists, it is necessary
To take measures to encourage people to take up these professions and to retain trained professionals in the professions.
That is why we want to:
Model vocational higher school:
Instead of the so-called “nursing apprenticeship”, which begins at the age of 15, a BHS model for health and social professions should be introduced, which can also be completed with the qualification “nursing assistant”.
In addition, the opportunity to complete a preparatory year in the nursing field must be created for those young people who have completed compulsory schooling in order to give interested young people the most comprehensive possible insight into the working world of nursing professions and to arouse in them an interest in taking up a nursing career.
Attractive jobs through better working conditions:
sufficient staff, fair pay and adequate working time models, higher collective wage, bonus for demanding working hours
There must be an opportunity to increasingly establish various health professions, such as therapists or dieticians, in primary care facilities.
Upgrading of professional groups: Inclusion of all health professions in the health professions register.
More apprenticeships:
There are currently too few training places at universities of applied sciences, schools for health and nursing and social care vocational schools.
The states are required to provide more training places.
Expansion of the skilled worker scholarship:
Also for assistant professions and the extension of the age limit for self-supporting scholarships for people over 35 years of age in order to enable lateral entrants and returnees to study at a university of applied sciences.
Expansion of therapy places in the health insurance system:
In future, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, psychotherapy, etc. must be available to all insured persons within a reasonable period of time as a health insurance benefit – free of charge for children.
Introduction of a nationwide, uniform, mandatory and needs-based personnel calculation for the health care and long-term care sectors.
Specialists
The main problem with contracted specialists is the long waiting times for an appointment.
The reasons for this are, on the one hand, that there is a fundamental shortage in some sectors, and, on the other hand, that many doctors do not want to sign contracts with health insurance companies.
There are currently 53 specialist doctor positions vacant throughout Austria.
Here, too, a scholarship system is intended to counteract this, so that subjects with a shortage (e.g. pediatricians, gynecologists, etc.) are given greater support - with the proviso that a health insurance contract must be accepted.
Equal benefits for everyone - regardless of job
According to experts, Kurz and Strache's health insurance reform will initially result in additional costs in administration, but will no longer provide a single service for patients.
But it does not provide the same benefits for everyone.
The civil servant in Vorarlberg continues to receive higher benefits than the mechanic in Burgenland.
We, on the other hand, want equal services for all people from Lake Constance to Lake Neusiedl.
The ultimate health app for all Austrians
From maps to emails and calendars: we organize our lives using smartphones.
We also want to enter the 21st century in the health sector.
We are creating an Austria.Healthy app that all Austrians can use free of charge.
It includes: Automatic reminders for doctor visits (preventive examinations, dental check-ups)
Information about pharmacy and doctor services on weekends
An electronic vaccination certificate including reminders for booster vaccinations
On request: ELGA on your mobile phone.
All documentation and all findings (blood results, other screenings for easy follow-up and tracking)
Austria: Number 1 in cancer research
Cancer causes enormous suffering to those affected and their families.
Let us create a fund to research and combat cancer.
Let us become a model country in cancer prevention and cure.
This is good for people’s health and for our country’s economy.
An important step in preventing cancer was the ban on smoking in bars and restaurants that we implemented.
Nothing is more important: healthy children
Hardly anything in life is associated with as much happiness as the birth of a child.
And hardly anything comes with so much responsibility: Will our child be born healthy?
Which hospital should we go to?
Is there a good pediatrician near me?
The first years of a child's life are particularly important for their later health: stress and poor nutrition in early childhood harm health well into adulthood.
We love our children and they all deserve a good start to a healthy life.
This means that families must have enough time and money.
The parents must earn enough
affordable housing
and can rely on the health system –
Fears for our existence and financial stress must not endanger the health of our children.
Every child who becomes ill must be given loving and excellent care – how much the parents earn should not play a role.
We need enough pediatricians and public health care so that our children grow up healthy – from head to toe, right down to their teeth.
But in Austria, every second school child has tooth decay – this can be avoided through a dental health initiative for children.
The World Health Organization (WHO) has set itself the goal of achieving caries-free status in 80% of all children by 2020.
This is how we do it.
Expansion of the mother-child pass
We want to expand the mother-child pass and thus ensure the health of all children in Austria regardless of their origin or financial situation.
To this end, compulsory visits to the dentist should be introduced from early childhood (from the age of 3).
From check-ups to caries prevention.
Prevention program against children's dental damage
Swedish model: From the child’s third year of life, regular visits to the dentist and check-ups are mandatory.
Dental treatments, especially caries prevention measures, are fully covered by health insurance until the child is 23 years old.
In the future, the annual free oral hygiene for children and adolescents will be extended from the age of 6 to the age of 23 (currently only from the age of 10 to the age of 18).
Amalgam-free fillings: There should be free alternatives to amalgam fillings up to the age of 23.
This avoids high levels of mercury exposure for children and young people.
By 2030, we want to have achieved the WHO target of 80% of all children being caries-free.
Pediatrician Offensive
More pediatrician positions and better contracts for pediatricians
should ensure adequate, comprehensive care.
In the future, there should generally no longer be waiting times of more than 15 minutes at pediatricians and at the same time there should be enough time for the doctor to devote himself in detail to the children.
We also want to provide scholarships for pediatricians and a corresponding priority for training places.
In addition, pediatricians should increasingly work together in primary care units with general practitioners, nursing staff and other health professionals, such as various therapists, to ensure holistic care for children and adolescents.
Free and sufficient access to diagnostic and therapeutic services for children and adolescents
Poor children of today are the chronically ill adults of tomorrow.
Due to the lack of availability, children must expect to wait nine months to a year for therapy options such as speech therapy, occupational therapy or psychotherapy.
Entire regions currently have no psychotherapy services for children.
According to estimates, there is a total shortage of around 60,000 to 80,000 health insurance-funded therapy places (psychotherapy, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, etc.).
However, this has dire consequences.
If a child with developmental delays, for example in language development, is not treated early enough and does not receive care, this leads to significant consequences and disadvantages in later life.
This can never be recovered.
Mental illnesses in early childhood also often have a lasting impact on a child’s life.
Of course, this hits low-income parents and their children doubly hard, as they cannot “buy” these missing benefits.
We therefore call for the nationwide expansion of the range of therapy places and for health insurance companies to cover the full costs for children.
For Grandma & Grandpa! Care security – out of love for the older generation.
From birth to old age – we look after each other.
Our parents and grandparents raised us with love and gave us everything – let us give them that love back when they need our help.
Being dependent on care and support in old age or due to illness is not easy.
You have to learn to live with needing the help of others for everyday things.
Society must convey to people in need of care: We are happy to help you, because you have also given us a lot.
This concerns 456,000 people who are dependent on care and support in Austria today.
We cannot leave them and their families alone.
We have to be there for them.
Every second family with a care case feels that they do not receive sufficient support.
In 80% of cases, the caregiver is the daughter, daughter-in-law or granddaughter – hard work for which many women also have to accept a loss of salary.
Caring for the older generation is the big issue for the future: by 2050, 750,000 people will be dependent on care and support – and we will need 80,000 nursing staff by then.
We must approach this with love.
We must not leave the care of our parents and grandparents to the market - care is not a field for economic enrichment of corporations at the expense of hard-working families.
And care is not a field for the exploitation of nursing staff – because they are there for our loved ones in difficult moments and treat them well – and we treat them well too.
People in need of care and their families have many worries – we can take some of them away together.
We must work together to care for those who can no longer care for themselves or can only do so to a limited extent.
People with low incomes and no savings must be able to rely on this: My mother will be cared for well, lovingly and - if possible and sensible - at home.
People with a good income and some savings need to be sure: My father is well provided for without me losing my hard-earned savings.
We only live in a safe society if we know that we will receive help in difficult situations.
Now comes the valorization of the care allowance – achieved in the free play of forces
Why we are in favour of care security – and why care insurance places unpredictable burdens on employees
Currently, the cost of care amounts to over 7 billion euros per year.
The state covers 6.4 billion of this – the rest is paid by those in need of care or their families.
The SPÖ wants these costs to be covered by the Care Guarantee Fund - financed from tax revenue.
This doesn’t cost the employees a cent more.
Nursing care insurance, on the other hand, places an additional burden on employees.
Nursing care insurance has existed in Germany since 1995.
Employees' contributions were originally set at 1 percent of their wages, and a public holiday was also canceled to finance the plan.
Since then, contributions to nursing care insurance have been increased several times – they currently stand at three percent of wages.
Applied to Austria, financing care through nursing care insurance would lead to an increase in non-wage labor costs of 6 percentage points.
(This means an increase in the contribution rate of 3 percentage points for employees and also for employers)
In addition, the system is highly dependent on the economic situation.
Social security systems come under pressure when the employment situation is weak.
If contributions are not increased, this would inevitably result in a reduction in benefits.
And that is exactly what the insurance companies are looking forward to.
The better the public services, the lower the demand for private insurance.
We have therefore decided to take a different approach: combining the best of both worlds.
The legal right to publicly funded care means that people can rely on good services in the event of needing care – in other words, insurance.
At the same time, this does not lead to an increase in non-wage labor costs, but rather care is financed fairly and in solidarity from taxpayers’ money according to the principle “those who have more can also contribute more.”
This is how we do it.
Legal right to affordable care:
Everyone has the right to age with dignity - free from existential fears.
This gives everyone a legal right to high-quality care, whether at home or in a nursing home - state-funded and guaranteed.
State care guarantee financed from the care fund:
The state covers all costs of care – mobile and in-home.
Around 650 million families currently pay privately for care services; in the future, this will be covered by the Care Guarantee Fund.
All federal and state funds are brought together there. The fund is financed from tax revenue and endowed with 7.5 billion euros.
That’s 1 billion euros more for care.
Compensate for financial needs through a millionaire tax:
Looking out for each other also means that everyone has to make an appropriate contribution.
Today, employees pay 80 percent of taxes and contributions in Austria.
Capital and assets contribute far too little compared to Europe.
We will only be strong if those who have been lucky also look after others and help to finance care for all Austrians.
Automatic care allowance without additional administrative procedures:
There is no longer any need to apply for care allowance.
The application for care allowance happens automatically when the need for care is determined.
Expanding care: We invest in a comprehensive and differentiated range of care services.
This means: expansion of mobile services, more places in nursing homes, better quality standards for 24-hour care.
For a nationwide, uniform, transparent, public care system.
Pay nursing staff properly:
Let us treat well those who treat our loved ones well.
There is an urgent need for more staff and better working conditions in the nursing sector: higher wages and family-friendly working hours should make the nursing profession more attractive.
In order to meet future demand for skilled workers, training places must be increased.
In addition, suitable school models are needed.
The training could take place at vocational higher schools (leaving with the qualification of nursing assistant).
Appreciate caregivers:
Caregivers deserve our utmost respect and recognition.
Supporting them is our top priority.
For example, there needs to be a legal right to part-time care or care leave so that you are not left to beg for help in an emergency.
There is a need for the expansion of care services, such as the further development of 24-hour care into everyday care, but also an information campaign by the care service so that caring relatives also know their rights and options (e.g. free pension insurance) and make use of them.
Nursing service center - no unnecessary visits:
In all federal states, the care center employees provide on-site advice and assistance and handle all administrative procedures.
Those affected need time and energy for other things – the administration should support them.
We love the country & our regions
When we think about politics, laws, and parties, we often have the image of Vienna as the capital and other major cities in our heads.
Because there are parliaments, state parliaments and governments there.
But anyone who wants to make politics for all people in Austria must also look at rural areas.
After all, 2 out of 3 Austrians live in rural areas.
Austria’s cities are growing.
More and more people are moving to the metropolises.
We know that our cities are worth living in, there is good childcare, public transport is more frequent, there is a greater choice of schools and apprenticeships, there are many doctors and many shopping opportunities.
Women in particular are moving to cities – they are looking for good jobs and childcare places.
But this “rural exodus” also has a disadvantage.
Rural regions and communities are suffering from the consequences: fewer inhabitants means a lack of consumers, a lack of young talent in companies and in clubs.
And that financing infrastructure is becoming more difficult.
Fewer and fewer doctors are venturing into rural areas.
The shortage of family doctors is particularly noticeable in rural areas.
Already, 200,000 people in Austria do not have a family doctor nearby – a problem that is getting worse.
In the next 10 years, 60 percent of general practitioners will have reached retirement age.
200,000 people in Austria do not have a family doctor nearby.
The mayors are facing major problems: How can schools, restaurants, doctor's offices, police stations, bus services and kindergartens be maintained?
How can they ensure that their communities become more livable and that more people want to stay?
90 percent of the area is rural.
2 out of 3 Austrians live in rural areas.
Problem of rural exodus:
5,000 people emigrate to Vienna alone every year.
This is how Austria lives.
Statistics Austria, data for 2017.
Cities
Urban medium and small centres
Regional Centres
Outer zones of centres
Rural area
Our vision: Strengthen regions and make them livable for everyone
Anyone who thinks they can play city against country with us is mistaken.
We want an Austria of togetherness.
An Austria in which we invest in rural areas and communities.
No matter where people live, they should find the best living and working conditions.
And those who live in rural areas should have good childcare, enough doctors, nursing services, schools and public transport, as well as access to fast internet.
No inn, no shop
Many places in Austria no longer have a landlord or local supplier. Often, guesthouses simply fall into disrepair. Because no successor has been found to take over the business.
“Since the end of the 1970s, the number (of pubs in Austria) has fallen from approximately
16,000 to today’s 8,500 to 9,000,” says Klaus Dutzler. He has documented the effects of the decline of pubs.
This makes everyday life more difficult for the residents. They lack a place to
Eating, celebrating – and a store for shopping.
This is how we do it.
The 7-point plan for rural areas.
1. Social and security package
Everyone should have a family doctor within 10 minutes:
To make this work, we want to motivate more doctors to open practices in rural areas.
Rural doctor scholarships, more help in setting up practices and the expansion of primary care centers can achieve this.
(--> For more family doctors, p. 29)
Reintroduction of the 20,000 campaign:
It has not only given thousands of people a job and a perspective, but has also revitalized Austria's communities.
The employees maintained sports facilities, looked after tenants as caretakers, maintained green spaces, cared for sick people and cleared snow from the streets in winter.
“The great thing about this campaign was that you could immediately see how it helped thousands of people. She has actually improved her life. For example, I have an employee in the city garden who is deaf and who has never had a chance before. This employee does all of our flower boxes and all of the new green plantings in the city center. You have to take a look at everything he has accomplished! The 20,000 campaign is one of the best labor market projects that Austria has ever seen.” – Günther Albel, Mayor of Villach
Everyone who needs care should be cared for individually:
It doesn’t matter whether you want to live at home or be cared for in a nursing home.
This is financed with a care guarantee fund.
(--> Legal right to affordable care, p. 37)
2,500 more police officers on Austria’s streets:
There is a shortage of thousands of police officers in Austria.
To ensure that there are enough police personnel working in rural areas, we will invest in maintaining police posts and in more police positions.
2. Supply package
Everyone should have an ATM nearby – and be able to access their money without fees:
That is why we will reintroduce a ban on ATM fees.
In order to ensure a comprehensive supply of ATMs, we want to hold banks accountable.
These should provide a minimum level of infrastructure.
Regional organic transition:
Our farmers produce excellent products.
We want to strengthen your regional production.
So that fewer apples from Chile end up on supermarket shelves, and more from the region.
Support for smaller agricultural businesses:
In Austria there are agricultural companies that make high profits.
At the same time, small and medium-sized farms are fighting for their existence.
We will therefore restructure the support system so that small and medium-sized farmers benefit more.
We want to limit direct funding to 150,000 euros.
We also want higher funding for the first 20 hectares.
3. Childcare and education package
Expansion of kindergartens:
We want to provide more financial support to municipalities so that they can build more kindergartens and offer longer opening hours with fewer closing days in the summer.
There should also be a second free year of kindergarten!
Expansion of all-day schools:
Every family should find a school with full-day care within a 20-kilometer radius.
This requires rapid expansion, and we want to support the communities in this.
( --> Reliable childcare, p.129)
4. Investment and economic package
Nationwide broadband expansion:
Austria must become a 5G pioneer – not only in urban areas, but especially in rural regions.
There is a need for rapid expansion and connections in all valleys, regions and communities in Austria.
Support local craftsmen – repair instead of throwing away:
We are increasingly inclined to simply throw away broken things instead of contacting the local repairman.
We therefore want a bonus for repairs.
This strengthens the local economy and is good for the environment.
SME bonus for public contracts:
Small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of the economy and the regions.
They should not turn a blind eye to (large) public contracts.
An SME bonus should be included in the tender criteria.
Continuation of the municipal investment package:
What was started under SPÖ Chancellor Christian Kern is now to be relaunched and extended.
Specifically, 175 million euros will be available for municipal investments.
5. Local transport package for municipalities
More money for transport routes: Those who live in rural areas need good local transport.
That is why we want a special investment program for municipalities so that they can expand local public transport options.
This is financed from the Climate Protection Fund.
( --> Local transport pact for municipalities, p. 15)
6. Living package:
Speculation with housing is no longer just an urban problem, but also in some rural regions – especially in tourist areas.
To ensure that housing remains affordable in rural areas, we want to prevent land from being sold off to foreign countries.
Denmark could serve as a model, as it prohibits the sale of land to foreign speculators.
( --> No sale of land, p. 49)
7. Volunteer package
Thousands of volunteers make Austria strong and united.
As firefighters and paramedics, they help their fellow human beings in disaster situations.
We have fought to ensure that volunteers receive continued pay when they are deployed.
But what they deserve in addition: special leave and, of course, shorter working hours overall – just like all employees.
That is why we reject the 12-hour day and the 60-hour week in their current form.
If you want people to volunteer alongside their jobs and families, make sure they have enough free time!
Proud of our business location
Companies in Austria are innovative and employees are productive.
And the state: it invests in infrastructure, education and the social safety net.
All of these are success factors that distinguish our business location and make it strong.
We want it to stay that way – and will protect our industry and jobs.
Austria is a competitive and high-performing business location – and has overtaken its neighbouring Germany in terms of productivity, GDP and demand.
We have our hard-working employees and innovative companies to thank for this.
They all create and secure the prosperity of our country.
Our well-developed welfare state also contributes to economic growth.
Why?
Because it guarantees stability.
Transfer payments prevent people from slipping into poverty when they lose income.
And they make it possible to consume.
This was particularly relevant during the financial crisis that began in 2008.
A strong welfare state makes a business location more resilient to crises and thus more competitive. WIFO study “Welfare state and location quality” 2018
Nor should we underestimate the value of our infrastructure.
To be successful, companies need an excellent transport network and a very good energy supply, which are provided by the public sector.
Austria offers all of this.
To ensure that this remains the case, we must invest – especially the digital infrastructure can be expanded, but is relevant for companies and employees.
But our business location is also coming under pressure due to globalization.
Cheap products from Asia, produced under poor working conditions and sometimes catastrophic environmental standards, put pressure on our domestic industry.
The expansion strategy of countries such as China, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates does not stop at Europe: corporations in these countries are buying shares in European companies via huge sovereign wealth funds.
The danger: If high-tech plants from Austria are transferred to foreign owners, they could be closed and the know-how transferred abroad.
The jobs and economic output will then be missing here.
Austria invests more than Germany in its infrastructure
Public investment as a percentage of GDP, Eurostat (2018)
3.5%
3.0%
2.5%
2.0%
1.5%
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
We want strong protection for our high technologies, which have been developed by researchers in Austria – and which the state has co-financed with taxpayers’ money.
We want to avert the danger of a sell-off of Austrian and European technology.
In this way, we secure entire industries and their jobs in the long term.
The largest Chinese fund now has a volume of around 1,000 billion US dollars. For comparison: This corresponds to 2.5 times the Austrian GDP.
Our vision: create prosperity, secure jobs – and maintain Austria’s economic power
We want our children and grandchildren to be better off than us.
They should look to their future with hope and be sure that they will find good training and jobs, that they will be able to live well from their income and that the economy in our country will grow.
For this to work, we must now invest in research and infrastructure
and ensure that new, ecological jobs are created.
We want to continue to be the country with the best-trained professionals in the world.
That is why we are protecting key companies from being sold off and investing in our transport and energy infrastructure.
This is how we do it.
For a foreign trade law with teeth:
The control of controversial foreign investments in Austria has so far been patchy and non-transparent.
However, comprehensive protection of water, energy, telecommunications, etc. from the shopping sprees of investment funds from third countries is a must: in an emergency, the public sector must be able to take comprehensive action against a sell-off of critical technologies and infrastructure of public services.
A “Made in Austria” fund to prevent the sell-off of Austrian technology:
We are creating a “Made in Austria” fund.
In the future, dividends from state holdings (currently around 500 million euros annually) will flow into this fund.
On the one hand, the fund is intended to secure public participation in important companies such as OMV or Verbund
and on the other hand invest in innovative Austrian companies.
The “Made in Austria” fund is also intended to serve as a protective shield against hostile takeovers (see Foreign Trade Act).
We promote the investing economy:
We support those companies that make investments, create new jobs, are climate pioneers and invest in the training and further education of their employees.
We want innovation bonuses for climate-relevant investments.
( --> Funding for climate innovation, p. 16)
We want to immediately implement a tax incentive for investments in the form of early depreciation.
SME bonus for public contracts:
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the backbone of the Austrian economy.
Around 2 million employees, or 2/3 of all employees, work in SMEs.
We want to support SMEs.
In the future, they should not be left out of (large) public contracts.
An SME bonus should be included in the tender criteria (strengthening of qualitative award criteria).
Securing state property:
We want to enshrine state ownership of critical infrastructure (e.g. water, energy or rail) in the constitution.
This prevents a sell-out.
( --> No sale, p. 54)
Let us strengthen artisans, especially in rural areas:
We are increasingly throwing away things that need to be repaired instead of contacting local craftsmen.
This not only has a negative impact on the environment, but also weakens the local economy in the region.
We therefore want a bonus for repairs.
This is intended to create incentives to have the old washing machine repaired by the electrician around the corner instead of throwing it away.
The premium should be 50 percent of a maximum of 600 euros per person per year.
( --> Investment and economic package, p. 42)
Better social security for the self-employed:
We want better social security for the self-employed.
The deductibles should be abolished and we want easier access to sick pay.
For a home to fall in love with. Housing should not be a luxury.
Many of us experience this: housing is one of the biggest cost drivers in our lives.
While wages have risen less over the past ten years, especially for lower and middle incomes, rents have risen sharply – especially in the private sector.
The result: At the end of the month there is less and less money left in the wallet.
Let's abolish the rental tax and relieve everyone of one month's rent per year.
Why does this happen?
On the one hand, the population is growing and available living space is becoming scarcer.
On the other hand, real estate speculators are exacerbating the housing shortage.
Real estate is increasingly being used as an investment object.
They generate returns for a few, while many others are desperately searching for affordable housing.
But tourism and the associated second homes are also a concern for the resident population in the regions.
When a property comes onto the market in tourist regions such as Kitzbühel, it is often snapped up in no time by foreign investors worth billions.
This drives up prices in general.
Online platforms such as AirBnB are also taking space away from the housing market in cities.
In Austria we see that where investments are made in social housing, rental prices remain stable across the entire housing market.
In cities where housing is left to the market, rental prices are exploding.
In London you can pay 570 euros for a 2-room apartment – ​​per week!
Example:
Kitzbuhel
8,200
Residents
1,033
Holiday homes
7,000 euros
costs one square meter.
Our vision: Housing is a right – and must not be left to the market alone
Everyone needs a home.
We want every family, every apprentice, every single person and every older couple to have a home that they can afford and in which they enjoy living.
But no market regulates that.
We have to do something about it.
The state should not earn 10 percent from the rent.
We therefore want to abolish VAT on rents.
This saves a family more than one month’s rent per year.
A measure that has an immediate effect.
And for families who own their own home (apartment or house), we are introducing a tax-deductible housing bonus of 500 euros per year.
We also want to invest in social housing
and curb speculation in housing.
Apartments are there to live in – not to make money.
This is how we do it.
Get rid of the rent tax! One month's rent less
We want to abolish VAT on rents, so that a family can save a whole month's rent.
For home builders, we want to achieve relief through a housing bonus that can be reclaimed from the tax office when filing a tax return (fully subject to negative taxation).
More reserved areas for social housing
When rezoning land for development, the municipality can reserve a share of 50 percent (as in Steyr) or almost 70 percent (as in Vienna) for social housing – and sell it to non-profit developers at low land costs.
Clear rules for brokerage platforms
There must be a nationwide reporting/registration requirement for rental platforms (e.g. Airbnb) so that valuable living space is not rented out on a weekly or daily basis - often without paying taxes.
No sale of land
Denmark could serve as a model here, as it does not allow the purchase of land to foreign speculators and has also negotiated this in the EU accession treaty.
Rent cap
By introducing a universal tenancy law, we want to set a ceiling on rent prices so that the dream of owning one's own home remains affordable for young families.
Precisely defined increases and reductions should lead to a real upper limit on rent prices in the future.
Strengths of non-profit housing
We want to constitutionally protect the zoning of “social housing” so that speculators do not come up with the idea of ​​fighting this regulation in court.
( --> How young people live, p. 137)
No bought politics.
Millions of Austrians work every day to make this country what it is.
Politicians must not sell it off to foreign oligarchs.
The Ibiza video by HC Strache (FPÖ) caused a political earthquake.
And it has revealed the political style of the turquoise-blue government: collecting large sums of money from major donors, conducting expensive election campaigns and making politics only in the interests of the donors: 60-hour weeks, lower corporate taxes and gifts to the real estate lobby.
In addition, the ÖVP and FPÖ have used the migrant trick to create a mood in order to justify cuts for all Austrians.
Serving the richest and playing the rest off against each other - that is not only dishonest, but also dangerous.
We need a policy that is guided by love for the country and its people.
Who doesn't listen to wealthy influencers, but listens to ordinary people.
We must prevent individual interests from buying their way into politics in this country with money.
We do not want American conditions, where big money determines politics.
We want politics for the people and with the people.
Social democracy guarantees that every vote counts equally.
This is how we do it.
Ban on large donations must remain:
Through the free play of forces in Parliament, we have managed to legally prohibit individual donations to parties of more than 7,500 euros.
But it is by no means certain whether the Ibiza Coalition 2.0 will not simply overturn this donation ban.
No major donors on government-affiliated supervisory boards:
No functions for (former) major donors or their relatives in state-owned companies.
No tax gift to foundation millionaires:
The richest Austrians have founded foundations to save taxes.
Now they want to withdraw their assets from the foundations again, but without paying capital gains tax on the increase in assets.
The ÖVP and FPÖ have planned a significant tax relief for them.
First cheap in, now even cheaper out – that is at Austria’s expense and we want to prevent that.
Mandatory justice check for every law:
Laws that promote the unequal distribution of wealth and income harm society, the economy and even people's health.
We therefore demand that every new law be examined for its distributional impact.
Scientific indicators are used to determine how laws affect income distribution – whether they promote social inequality or contribute to greater distributive justice.
Protecting non-profit housing from privatization:
In Parliament, we have constitutionally protected our Austrian water from being sold off.
We also want to anchor non-profit and social housing in the constitution.
Across Europe, the privatisation of municipal housing has caused great damage.
In Austria, the privatization of BUWOG is still being dealt with by the courts.
We want to ban privatization and ensure affordable housing.
No sell-off of critical infrastructure such as rail, electricity, gas networks:
Let us also protect our critical infrastructure from being sold off and from the profit interests of individuals with a constitutional provision.
The turquoise-blue policy has paid off for its major donors.
The Ibiza coalition has received many donations from the real estate industry.
And the demands of the Association for the Real Estate Industry made it, in part, 1:1 into the government program and then into the Federal Law Gazette.
There are also tax gifts: properties can now be sold tax-free.
However, only in a holding structure. “Home builders” must continue to pay their property transfer tax.
The “AUVA reform” aimed to significantly reduce the contribution of employers to the accident insurance of their employees.
That would cost 500 million euros – which the AUVA would then be missing.
The company KTM, the Kurz donor Pierer, would thus pay 480,000 euros less per year.
He would have refinanced his donation of 436,563 euros to Kurz in just one year.
During the 2017 election campaign, representatives from the hotel industry donated 28,000 euros to Kurz.
In the government, former ÖVP election campaign manager Köstinger, as head of tourism, reduced the VAT for hoteliers to 10 percent.
This increases the hotel industry’s profits by almost 3 percent.
Cost to taxpayers: 120 million euros annually.
The manager Wolfgang Berndt donated 25,000 euros to the ÖVP during the election campaign.
Since May 2019 he has been Chairman of the Supervisory Board of OMV.
The Währing private clinic donated 10,000 euros to the FPÖ during the election campaign.
The government then ensured that the maternity clinic received money from the social security contributions (PRIKRAF).
The entrepreneur Peter Mitterbauer paid 45,000 euros to Sebastian Kurz.
His daughter Maria-Theresia Niss-Mitterbauer ran for second place for the Vienna ÖVP and now sits in the National Council.
Porr's main shareholder Klaus Ortner donated 500,000 euros to the ÖVP in the election year alone.
His daughter was appointed by the Kurz government to the supervisory board of the state-owned investment company ÖBAG.
She also sits on the supervisory board of the construction group Porr - one of the largest recipients of government contracts.
Hotel and property owner Teresa Pagitz donated 15,000 euros to the ÖVP during the election campaign.
Since 2018 she has been a member of the supervisory board of ÖBB Personenverkehrsgesellschaft.
For the love of freedom and a safe lifestyle
Austria is one of the safest countries in the world.
We have a stable, functioning constitutional state and our emergency services do excellent work.
Anyone living in Austria can therefore feel safe compared to other countries.
But we know that not all people feel equally safe or able to move freely.
In order for all people in the country to be able to live without fear, we must look closely and act: namely where intimidation and attacks still occur.
In international comparison, Austria ranks third among the safest countries in the world.
This is due, among other things, to the expanded civil rights in the country, to a hard-working police and judiciary, and to a general decline in violence.
If you look at the security report and the crime statistics, you will notice that reports against offenders remain constant – even though the population is growing.
And the overall number of violent crimes is declining.
That is gratifying!
But we also know that a measurably safe and free society does not mean that everyone feels safe and free.
People in Austria have fears.
Fear of societal upheavals and impending dangers.
Or fear because they have experienced discrimination, attacks or even violence.
Too many women still suffer violence from acquaintances, partners or ex-partners.
It is then important that there are quick contacts, help and facilities nearby that can help people out of the emergency situation and offer protection.
Politically motivated attacks in 2017:
1,200
racist attacks in Austria.
500
anti-Semitic attacks in Austria.
100
Reports under the Prohibition Act.
“We have nothing to fear except fear itself.” Franklin D. Roosevelt
Anyone who believes that our prosperity, our security, our tolerance can be used to build an unfree, unjust and unequal parallel society must also leave.
Radical religious movements have no place in Austria.
That is why we are consistently committed to the fight against political Islam.
Gay men, lesbian women and transgender people still experience attacks in 2019.
Be it insults, intimidation, exclusion or even physical attacks.
We won’t look away there either.
In an open, free society, no one should be discriminated against because of their identity or sexual orientation.
Everyone must be able to live and love without fear!
The ZARA advice center documented almost 1,200 racist attacks in 2017.
This means that in Austria there are about 3 racist attacks per day.
The Forum Against Anti-Semitism recorded over 500 cases of anti-Semitic attacks, graffiti or comments in 2017.
And there were 100 convictions under the Prohibition Act.
This means: 2 cases of re-activation per week.
We don’t want to accept any of this!
Our vision: no place for hate and violence!
Everyone must feel safe in Austria.
People who want to isolate themselves or even divide society should know that they have no political, cultural or any other future with us.
This applies to fundamentalists as well as to inflammatory nationalists and all those who disagree with the way we understand community.
We want everyone in Austria to be able to live without fear and violence.
That no one is discriminated against or attacked because of their origin, name, gender, religion or sexual orientation.
This includes ensuring that there are sufficient facilities to document attacks and provide protection.
And this includes strengthening those security forces that intervene in emergencies – and bring about justice.
Legal protection officers monitor the conduct of undercover investigations, surveillance of persons and procedures for solving criminal offenses. They ensure that laws are observed and rights are protected in all processes.
This is how we do it.
Protecting women and girls from violence:
There must be counseling centers in every federal state to support those affected.
So far they only exist in 5 federal states.
We need to expand the number of places in women's shelters.
We need at least one women's shelter place per 10,000 inhabitants.
We also want to invest more in prevention: femicides are often the result of a long spiral of violence.
We must combat violence against women before it occurs.
Prevent radicalization:
We want the right-wing extremism report to be reintroduced in Austria in order to be able to identify dangerous groups and tendencies in a timely manner and take action.
We want more staff for the extremism department of the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution and Counterterrorism.
Investments in police:
We will invest in personnel.
And thus provide security to those men and women who ensure our security: when it comes to quality training, further training, equipment and the furnishing of police stations.
We also want 2,500 more police officers on Austria’s streets.
Security forces will then be relieved of bureaucracy – and can deal with citizens’ concerns.
Legal Protection Commissioner in Parliament:
Legal protection officers should no longer be subordinate to ministries.
We saw in the BVT affair what happens when ministers try to influence civil servants.
Therefore, these legal protection officers should be brought together in a new body of the National Council – comparable to the Court of Auditors and the Ombudsman – and be able to work independently of the government.
Justice Action Plan:
--> A comprehensive personnel package:
An additional 100 judges, 100 prosecutors and 400 administrative staff are needed.
And the 200 vacancies in the prison guard sector also need to be filled immediately.
Not only the enforcement of measures, but also the working conditions there must be urgently improved.
--> More prevention and protection against violence: Judicial competence centers to combat online hate and domestic violence, including easily accessible reporting centers with interdisciplinary teams of police officers, public prosecutors and psychologists, are to be set up.
--> Digitization focus for the Ministry of Justice
--> Make the business and corruption prosecution office independent:
The WKSta should not be subject to the instructions of the Minister of Justice.
Instead, we want a federal prosecutor elected by the National Council and not subject to instructions to head the WKStA.
-->The establishment of juvenile justice centres:
There must be a centre in every state capital where judicial and social-educational competencies are bundled.
Security of existence for the Federal Army:
The Ibiza coalition is responsible for the fact that the Austrian Armed Forces are in a catastrophic budgetary situation.
This concerns those forces that help citizens, among other things, in disaster situations.
We will invest in the Federal Army so that it can work well and fulfil its missions.
More rights for parliamentary committees:
In future, those committees of the National Council responsible for monitoring secret and intelligence services will be able to question informants directly.
Integration before immigration Clear rules, clear values, successful integration
We are clearly committed to the principle of “integration before immigration”.
Responsible politics that creates future opportunities for people begins locally.
To achieve this, the international community must pull together.
This requires solidarity and not national isolation.
Nothing improves if you incite people but do not lift a finger to improve the situation of those affected.
Therefore, let us talk about additional ideas and initiatives that will sustainably combat the causes of migration and make integration possible.
Large migration flows to Europe have also been caused by cuts in aid on the ground, because the situation for the refugees in the camps was no longer bearable.
Of course: Before you starve to death in a refugee camp, you dare to take the leap to Europe.
Every person would probably do it that way.
Even after the large refugee movement in 2015, some people did not recognize the signs of the times.
The Ibiza coalition, for example, has, without batting an eyelid, cut the funds for the foreign disaster fund from 20 to 15 million euros.
When they were “caught” doing this, the blame was quickly placed on the officials of the Ministry of Finance.
We are countering this cynical policy of discussing problems, inciting people, pointing the finger at people, but at the same time not lifting a finger to improve the situation of those affected, with a consistent concept ranging from combating the causes of flight on the ground to politically controlling labor migration.
For us, the obligation to help people who are threatened by violence and persecution is beyond dispute.
Much more needs to be done here than has been done so far, particularly in terms of local aid - this also applies to strengthening local civil society and free media.
But this must not happen through illegal migration, which must be limited to zero.
In return, there is a need for legal escape routes with uniform European standards and UNHCR-compliant processing centres.
Anyone who has the right to asylum is part of Austria.
This also means that we must and want to integrate those people who are already in Austria and will stay here as best as possible.
We provide sufficient integration opportunities to ensure an optimal start in Austria.
However, those entitled to asylum are obliged to accept this offer.
In this way we guarantee good cooperation in Austria.
We want everyone in Austria to have the chance to live a successful life, but at the same time we demand a contribution from everyone.
This is how we do it.
Escape and asylum
European development plan for the establishment of suitable habitats close to the respective homeland under the flag of the UNHCR
Common European asylum system with uniform asylum procedures and fair distribution
Create European processing centres at the EU’s external border and limit the maximum duration of an asylum procedure to 3 months
In a further step, processing centres outside the EU under UNHCR mandate to prevent dangerous escapes across the Mediterranean and deprive people smugglers of their business basis.
Better control of Europe’s external borders through massive expansion of Frontex.
Doubling the number of civil servants to 20,000 through reallocations in the EU budget.
Increased efforts to negotiate return agreements for rejected asylum seekers
European “Marshall Plan” for Africa: No one should have to flee, therefore the causes of flight must be effectively combated.
(--> p. 154)
Work & labor migration
Training and qualification initiative for people with low qualifications
Stop wage pressure on the labor market!
Therefore, only key workers should be able to come to Austria via the Red-White-Red Card – the planned reduction of the income limit for the Red-White-Red Card by 20% under the turquoise-blue coalition must not happen.
No expansion of the list of shortage occupations until full employment is achieved
Fight against wage and social dumping at European and national level. (Triple of controls, doubling of penalties for wage and social dumping).
The integration year for asylum seekers to learn the language and prepare for the labour market must be reintroduced.
Asylum seekers in apprenticeships should have the opportunity to complete their training.
It makes no sense to deport well-integrated people and instead bring foreigners who are not yet integrated to Austria.
Living together in Austria
The values ​​of the Enlightenment include: equality between men and women, equality between heterosexual and homosexual couples;
our laws are above religious beliefs
Creation of an integration model for Austria, but also personal commitment to integration.
We love our cultural nation Austria
Austria is a country of museums, operas and balls.
Tourists and culture lovers appreciate all of this in our country.
But culture is more: when we think of culture, we also think of street festivals, music clubs, dance and theater groups, large and small exhibitions - and that everyone should be able to take part in these activities if they want to.
We want to support creative artists and ensure that culture is accessible to everyone!
Cultural workers make Austria a better place to live.
Whether musicians, writers, poets, theater producers, painters, cartoonists or actors, sculptors and curators: they provide us with material and works that entertain us, make us think or sometimes even provoke us.
And that’s a good thing!
Because all of this fulfills us and shows how urgently we need a society that is rich in culture.
Working in the cultural sector involves great challenges.
Artists rarely have stable career paths.
They work on a project basis, sometimes employed, sometimes self-employed, sometimes unemployed in between.
In some industries, employment for just a few days even predominates.
They often have to combine several jobs to make ends meet.
Income is irregular and larger expenses are not always feasible.
About a third of artists are at risk of poverty.
All of these issues create problems regarding the social security of artists – problems that we want to solve!
Our vision: More art for people – more support for art
Those who give us artistic works deserve respect and support.
That is why we want to strengthen Austria as a cultural location – and make culture accessible to everyone in Austria.
This is how we do it.
More cultural education:
We need low-threshold offers and special campaigns for those who are in a financially difficult situation.
The federal museums are to offer a free museum Sunday.
The federal theatres should be given increased incentives to cooperate with other institutions such as schools.
More innovation in mediation:
A separate funding scheme for innovative mediation programmes will be established in the Ministry of Culture.
In this way, we bring art and culture into the everyday lives of many rather than just a few.
Voluntary Cultural Year:
Similar to the Voluntary Social Year, there should be a Voluntary Cultural Year in Austria.
Young people should be given the opportunity to get a taste of the cultural sector and to develop themselves in an exciting environment.
Not only the volunteers themselves benefit from this, but especially smaller cultural initiatives.
These are of great importance as local cultural providers.
In this way we strengthen the cultural infrastructure.
Valorization of cultural funding:
Many cultural institutions are struggling with stagnating budgets, even though expenses for personnel and purchases are increasing.
This means that they have less money available due to inflation.
This affects small cultural associations as well as the State Opera.
That is why we want to valorize funding in all areas of art.
So that cultural workers can work safely.
Digitalisation Fund:
We will set up a fund to help cultural institutions make the transition to the digital world.
Donate:
Donations to non-profit organizations should be made easier – an additional support.
Agency for Building Culture:
When it comes to building culture, the implementation of building culture guidelines is necessary.
These are about quality living, resource conservation and climate protection and the design of public spaces – in other words, ultimately about quality of life.
To implement this, we are establishing our own agency for building culture, which will also act as a consulting, mediation and research institution and will actively exercise the existing competencies of the federal government in overarching spatial planning matters.
Task Force Social Security for Artists:
All regulations in social security law must be examined for discrimination against artists and whether they correspond to the realities of artistic life.
To this end, we will set up a cross-departmental task force that will also oversee implementation.
Internships, volunteer work and internships:
Binding regulations are needed here.
The hard work of young people must not be exploited.
Taking responsibility as a funding provider:
Funding bodies must pay more attention to compliance with social security and labor law regulations.
In addition, we want to work with cultural workers to develop binding minimum standards for the remuneration of creative work.
These must then also be taken into account when calculating public funding.
There is also a need for a common collective agreement for federal museums.
Reform of the Artists’ Social Insurance Fund and the Support Fund for Special Emergencies:
We want access to help to be easier and less bureaucratic.
Adjust scholarships:
State scholarships must be raised to the level of the minimum wage.
In addition, we want to expand scholarships for single parents.
More mobility for artists:
We want to create a central contact and coordination point for artist visas.
Even large event organizers often have problems when inviting artists who require a visa.
Women’s package for the cultural sector:
In the film industry, women are significantly underrepresented in certain positions, are paid less for their work and receive less support.
Female characters in films suffer from undifferentiated portrayal.
What is needed here is a concept for the advancement of women with binding targets, quotas to eliminate inequality between women and a better balance between work and family life.
We also want to set up an independent victim protection commission in cases of sexual harassment or sexual abuse in cultural institutions, including the right to sue.
No exploitation of children:
The scandal surrounding the State Opera Ballet Academy makes it necessary to reorganize the youth work in this institution – with a training concept that is suitable for children and young people.
We defend freedom of the press
To make good decisions, we need good information.
Only then can we compare weaknesses and strengths and make informed decisions about what we do.
What is good when buying a washing machine is even more important when making our choice.
That is why we need independent media that can research well and report freely.
Media outlets across Europe are under attack.
In Hungary, Poland and Italy, critical journalists are publicly attacked and insulted by the government.
Under the Ibiza coalition, similar methods have also become part of everyday life in Austria.
But we want to do more than just reverse this negative development.
We want media that are prepared for social developments and technological change.
We want to secure media freedom in Austria for the future.
Freedom of speech, freedom of the press and freedom of art are the foundation of a functioning democracy.
A government must be able to tolerate its policies being questioned and its decisions being criticized – without editors being insulted and put under pressure.
Good politics also withstands criticism.
Bad politics doesn't suddenly become good if you silence people.
Many editors reported on strong influence from the ministerial offices under the Kurz government and also on deliberate misinformation: Sebastian Kurz's press spokesman, for example, distributed dossiers with false information at press conferences.
The FPÖ, in turn, has a particular problem with the ORF.
In their opinion, it should be destroyed.
At an AfD conference, FPÖ state councilor Podgorschek even spoke of the “neutralization” of the ORF.
It did not come to that, but independent, international organizations have already observed the negative development for press freedom in Austria: Reporters Without Borders has downgraded Austria by 5 places, to 16th place.
Our vision: Strengthen the diversity and independence of Austrian media
We measure all media policy measures by whether they strengthen the democratic power of the media and lead to more diversity, independence and high-quality reporting.
To achieve this, journalists must be able to work in independent editorial offices.
The majority of Austrian newspapers have joined together in the Austrian Press Council. The council was founded for the self-regulation of print media in Austria. Its aim is to ensure editorial quality, responsible journalism and the guarantee of press freedom. He is also the author of the Code of Honor for the Austrian press.
This is how we do it.
Re-regulate press funding:
The prerequisite for receiving press funding should be fair working conditions in accordance with the journalists’ collective agreement.
The level of funding will depend, among other things, on membership in the Press Council. Media that publish anti-Semitic or racist content should no longer receive public funding.
Enshrine the independence of editorial staff in law and safeguard it through editorial statutes
Expanding Austria as a media location:
To this end, we want to invest in the domestic creative industries.
We want Austrian content to be represented in public and private media with an appropriate quota of 30 percent.
More support for private media operators:
Diversity of media also means diversity of opinions.
That’s why we want to support private media more.
We place a particular emphasis on non-commercial private broadcasting.
This is characterized by freedom from advertising, open access to program production for the general public and a non-profit, non-profit organization and working method.
Secure ORF:
The ORF has an important democratic function.
It promotes the free formation of opinions and provides balanced information.
To ensure that he has sufficient resources, we want to close the streaming gap.
The financing of public broadcasting cannot depend on the device on which the ORF programme is consumed.
More justice is needed here.
Making ORF fit for the future:
The ORF must meet the demands of our time, which is why we want to abolish the 7-day rule in the ORF TVthek.
( --> Contemporary media policy, p.147)
So that more work remains.
A tax reform that resonates with people.
Life in Austria is beautiful.
We make sure that everyone benefits.
This requires lower taxes on labor.
Daily shopping has become a burden in recent years.
Life is becoming more expensive in Austria.
And: Those who have less pay more.
Although the “official” inflation rate is relatively low, weekly shopping has recently become 4.2 percent more expensive.
General inflation was only half as high at 2.0 percent.
51% of Austrians have hardly anything left at the end of the month that they could save.
In Austria, no one should stand there on the 25th of the month and wonder how they will feed themselves and their families until their next paycheck.
But many hard-working people are in this situation.
Our vision: Those who work must be able to make a good living from it.
It's that simple.
As social democrats, we are convinced that those who work should pay less taxes - not those who let others work.
Those who live in an apartment must be relieved of their burden - not those who speculate with apartments.
Those who can afford it must do more.
This means: We need fair wages.
We need fair rents.
We need fair taxes.
Curve of winners: 85% benefit from the SPÖ model more
Share of wage tax and income tax payers 85% 11.5% 3.5%
1,800
1,600
1,400
1,200
1,000 800 600 400 200
Tax cut
1,000 euros 3,600
6,000
Gross income
This is how we do it.
1,700 Euro minimum wage throughout Austria
In Austria, wage policy is a matter for the social partners through collective agreements.
We want to strengthen this system.
We want to ensure a minimum wage of 1,700 euros through collective agreements, Austria-wide.
In order to prevent a blockade by the employers' side, the instruments of the statute and the minimum wage tariff are to be expanded and thus the collective bargaining system as a whole is to be strengthened.
The accompanying legal measure – strengthening the statutes – is to come into force by January 1, 2021 at the latest.
This will ensure that a minimum wage of 1,700 euros is introduced as quickly as possible for all full-time employees.
All employees benefit from higher minimum wages because if the minimum wage is raised, all wages also increase.
The first 1,700 euros tax-free for everyone
You have to be able to live off a full-time job.
We want to ensure this with higher (minimum) wages and correspondingly lower taxes on labor, and not by cutting minimum benefits for children who are already at the poverty line.
That is why we want to implement a very concrete model after the election.
The first 1,700 euros will be tax-free for all Austrians from January 1, 2020.
In doing so, we are placing a clear focus on small and medium incomes, as this means a tax cut of around 1,100 euros per year for all people with a gross monthly income of 1,700 euros or more.
That is socially just.
Abolition of rental tax & creation of a housing bonus
We want to abolish VAT on rents, so that a family can save a whole month's rent.
We want a housing bonus for house and apartment owners that can be reclaimed from the tax office when filing a tax return (fully subject to negative taxation).
Social security bonus for small incomes
For low incomes, the social security bonus in the form of a tax credit is to be increased by 300 euros (currently up to 400 euros).
Pensioners should also benefit from the increase in the social security bonus.
If the ÖVP and FPÖ have their way, this relief will not come into effect until the year after next – i.e. 2021.
We want this to happen more quickly and will fight in Parliament to ensure that this stage of the tax reform takes effect as of January 1, 2020.
1,700 Euro minimum wage in the public sector
We want no one who works full-time in Austria to earn less than 1,700 euros per month in the future.
It goes without saying that the public sector sets a good example.
That is why we want to enforce a minimum wage of 1,700 euros in the public sector.
I don't pay anything, I'm rich. Not with us.
The more you have, the more you contribute to society?
Incorrect.
Because the rich and super-rich pay a lower share of taxes than the rest of us.
That's not fair.
A society only functions well if everyone contributes as much as they can.
Under the turquoise-blue government, large companies and corporations were given generous gifts.
The planned reduction in accident insurance alone would bring millions to large companies.
The AUVA (the General Accident Insurance) lost half a billion euros.
This cannot be offset by savings in administration.
Because the entire administration currently costs only a fraction of this amount.
So where does the money come from?
Benefits must be cut.
Less and worse care for us - in return for a tax gift worth millions to companies.
The planned tax reform should also bring a lot of money into their pockets.
1.5 billion euros were earmarked for reducing corporate profit tax.
We believe that broader shoulders should also contribute more to tax revenue.
Our vision: Everyone contributes to a just society.
This also applies to the richest.
For us, this means that income, assets and inheritances over one million must contribute a fair share in the future.
This is how we do it.
In Austria
Top tax rate of 55% for income over 1 million euros indefinitely:
Currently, in Austria, you pay a top tax rate of 55% for all income over 1 million euros per year.
However, this top tax rate is limited to 2020.
We want to lift this limitation and make the top tax rate for millionaires a permanent law.
Millionaire levy for millions in assets and millions in inheritances:
Wealth is extremely unequally distributed in Austria.
According to estimates by the JKU, 50% of households in Austria own only 2.5% of the total wealth, while the group of multi-millionaire households alone - the top 1% - owns more than 40% of the total wealth.
This unequal distribution is socio-politically problematic.
The Ibiza video has shown in a frightening way how quickly we in Austria can end up with bought politics.
Before the end of large donations, which we pushed through in Parliament this summer, millions were donated to one party.
It fits the picture that this one party is the biggest opponent of millionaire taxes, but at the same time wants to reduce taxes for large corporations (corporation tax).
We, on the other hand, are of the opinion that millions of dollars in assets in Austria should make a fair contribution to the common good, for example to finance care, through a millionaire levy or an inheritance tax on inheritances worth millions.
In Europe
Corporations pay taxes where they make profits:
To this end, the EU Commission has proposed the introduction of a group tax.
Within the framework of the so-called Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB for short), each group company will no longer be taxed individually, but the group as a whole.
This means that profit shifting within the group has no tax effect.
In order to cover Internet companies, the concept of the digital permanent establishment is to be integrated into the GCCTB.
The fact that only parts of the group within the EU are to be included is acceptable, since 80% of the profit shifting takes place within the EU itself.
We want to put the implementation of the corporate tax on the agenda of the EU budget currently being negotiated.
EU-wide minimum corporate tax of 25%:
As a flanking measure, we want to implement a Europe-wide minimum tax of 25% for companies so that the tax race to the bottom finally comes to an end.
Reduction of subsidies for EU countries that lack solidarity:
Until there is a mandatory minimum tax rate, EU subsidies should be linked to an appropriate tax level.
It cannot be that Austrian taxpayers finance tax dumping in EU tax havens with their contributions.
Finally implement financial transaction tax:
The core component of the FTT is the taxation of share and bond trading at 0.1% of the assessment base and of derivatives transfers at 0.01% of the underlying value.
The aim of the Commission's draft directive was to ensure that the financial sector contributes appropriately to the costs of bank rescues following the crisis and to de-attract certain transactions that are detrimental to the efficiency of financial markets (in particular so-called high-frequency transactions).
Negotiations on the FTT have been virtually put on hold.
They must be resumed immediately.
Reform of the EU VAT system – fight against tax fraud:
The proposal for a directive on a definitive VAT system aims to tax cross-border B2B supplies of goods in the same way as domestic supplies in the future, thereby reducing the vulnerability to fraud.
Additional burdens for exporting companies are to be avoided by a one-stop shop (tax office).
A second proposal for a directive from January 2018 is intended to give member states more flexibility in setting VAT rates.
Currently, two reduced tax rates are permitted; in the future, there will be three reduced tax rates plus one real exemption.
This would allow for the genuine exemption of rents in Austria, as we have proposed.
We support the Commission's proposals to prevent carousel fraud and to provide more national flexibility in the design of VAT.
Happy to go to work and happy to go home
Live healthily through good work – and enough free time
Although we are becoming more and more productive, this brings little relief to employees.
Two out of three employees in Austria feel increasing pressure at work.
E-mail, smartphones and social media ensure constant accessibility - for many people it is hardly possible to switch off properly anymore.
The work extends deep into family life.
Long-term stress has serious physical and psychological consequences: too much work makes you depressed and ill.
People who have to be constantly reachable have twice the risk of depression.
People who work under high pressure without rest are more likely to suffer from sleep disorders, cardiovascular diseases and have an increased risk of cancer.
Too much and too stressful work therefore also increases sick leave: sick leave due to work-related psychological stress currently costs us 3.5 billion euros.
Almost every second Austrian man and woman (40 percent) goes to work while sick.
Working up to 30 hours a week has a positive effect on our performance; anything more than that takes away our energy and concentration.
A study by the University of Melbourne shows that long working hours not only reduce performance, but also lead to a sharp increase in errors and injuries.
Our vision: Healthy work
Work must not destroy us.
Work should be fun and meaningful.
We work to live – not the other way around.
And those who have worked all their lives should be able to enjoy many healthy years in retirement.
In Austria, people aged 65 have seven to eight healthy years left, in Sweden it is 16.
Working hours per week
(Eurostat 2016)
Greece Austria Great Britain Czech Republic EU-28 Germany Netherlands Sweden France Denmark
35 4045
This is how we do it.
Right to a 4-day week
We want a legal right to a four-day week - and therefore three days off.
We also want to gradually reduce working hours to 35 hours with full pay compensation.
The leisure option should also be available to more employees.
We reject the 12-hour day and the 60-hour week in their current form.
Legal right to part-time work that fits in with life
Part-time work can have many advantages, but it should also be viewed critically because long periods of low pay are disadvantageous - especially for women.
However, part-time parental work, part-time retirement, part-time care work and part-time education work can be necessary and useful for a limited period of time in certain phases of life.
The right to unavailability
Thanks to mobile phones, tablets and laptops, work takes up ever larger parts of our free time.
Legally speaking, answering emails and making phone calls would be considered working time, but in reality they are rarely considered that way.
In order to ensure that employees have undisturbed leisure time and relaxation, we want to establish a fundamental right to be unavailable.
Mental health is a matter close to our hearts
More and more people suffer from mental illnesses.
And these have serious consequences if left untreated.
We want easy access to psychotherapeutic care on health insurance and the free choice of therapist if the diagnosis is appropriate.
6th week of vacation for everyone
Fewer and fewer employees are entitled to the sixth week of vacation.
They must have worked for their current employer for at least 13 to 20 years to be eligible after 25 years of service.
Such long years of service in one company are very rare today: We want all periods of service to be added together when determining entitlement to the 6th week of holiday after 25 years of service - even if you have worked for several employers.
Good Friday as a holiday for all
Austrian companies are doing very well, workers and employees are achieving a lot.
A Good Friday off would not even amount to half a percent of annual wage costs.
Companies could easily afford this.
Bring on fair employment contracts
6 months of work without a weekend off.
“All in” flat rates of 32 euros, which cover all overtime.
Contracts that allow overtime to expire.
Contracts that turn working people into “one-man companies” even though they are supposed to be employees.
This is all reality for too many working people.
We want good conditions for our economy so that it can grow – naturally.
But certainly not at the price of exploiting working people and putting them under pressure on a daily basis.
We want good working conditions and fair contracts for everyone in Austria.
That’s why we are declaring war on restrictive contracts and cheating clauses!
There are 1.6 million new employment relationships every year.
The labor market in our country is dynamic.
This has advantages and disadvantages.
Those who are well qualified will find job offers and can even switch to another industry.
But for those who urgently need a job and are under pressure, it can be difficult.
As a job seeker and prospective employee, you are often in a weaker position compared to potential bosses.
And some employers take advantage of this.
They use legally tricky employment contracts to suppress wages, cheat in flat rates or demand that people who are actually working under instructions become pseudo-self-employed – without employment rights and at full risk.
According to the Chamber of Labor, 9 out of 10 employment contracts contain clauses that are to the detriment of employees.
Especially after the ÖVP, FPÖ and NEOS forced the 12-hour day on working people, complaints about pressure on employees and insidious clauses in employment contracts are piling up: luxury hotels demand blanket consent to 60-hour weeks – there is no trace of “voluntariness”.
In addition, work schedules that do not even allow for one free weekend per month.
This is exploitation and mistreatment of workers!
In addition, there are so-called “expiry clauses”, “all-in clauses” and “competition clauses” that deprive employees of wages, overtime payments and mobility.
Forfeiture clauses stipulate that claims to overtime pay and wages simply expire.
If employees want to delete such clauses from their contract, they risk losing their jobs.
“All-in” clauses are also deceptive and deprive employees of fair pay: salaries are set higher – but they cover overtime, weekend work and the like at a flat rate.
In the overall calculation, the hourly rate is then much lower.
If an employee wants to change jobs, “non-compete clauses” can put a stop to her plans.
Such clauses prohibit working in the same industry as before for a certain period of time – in order not to become a competitor to the former employer.
Failure to comply with the clause will result in severe penalties.
Finally, there are jobs that make you a “crowdworker” and a “pseudo-self-employed person”
Mini-tasks are outsourced – reviews of products in online mail order – and only measurable performance is paid for.
There are no breaks, no holidays, no overtime, no interaction with other employees.
And anyone who has ever ordered food or looked for a replacement for a taxi knows them: bicycle delivery people, Uber drivers, cleaning staff who come home with a click.
They are also paid according to specific performance, are not employees and are not protected under employment law.
Our vision: Those who work should not be deprived of their income through dirty tricks
Our working world is dynamic, new jobs are being created, new companies are being founded.
And unfortunately, practices and tricks are also developing to suppress wages and increase profits – all at the expense of working people.
We will ensure that unfair clauses and exploitative working conditions are a thing of the past.
Those who work deserve respect and a fair income!
“Labor law has been ignored time and again. In 2016, there was no correct holiday pay, no breaks, no insurance, and no compensation for wear and tear on materials. Later in the winter, protective equipment was no longer provided. Management explained to us that Foodora is a dynamic tech company and a works council would not fit the business model because it would only slow down processes.”
— Adele Siegl is a Foodora works council member.
In an interview with kontrast.at.
Veronika Bohrn-Mena on
contrast.at
Everyday life of an Uber driver
Dinko has been driving for Uber for three months. At first, he expected a lot of freedom from the job: applying and starting work were quick and easy, he only had to provide his free license number. The only personal contact with “uber” was during the two-hour “induction” session, together with eight other people in a small room in the Vienna Gasometer.
The following week he had to advance 400 euros for the rental of the registered “Uber” car. After 10 days in which he was on the road for about 8 hours a day, he earned 1,000 euros. He had to deduct 700 euros from this for car rental and fuel. And it didn't stop there: as a new self-employed person, he also had to use the money to pay his social security contributions.
Dinko has no influence on the fare, which is set by “Uber”. If a passenger subsequently complains, the driver's fare will be deducted. So Dinko has to work at least 50, more likely 60 hours a week to even begin to make ends meet. He is not entitled to unemployment benefits. There is no sick pay either; he is only entitled to just under 9 euros from the 43rd day of illness. Dinko cannot afford days off or holidays; he has long been looking for another job. He says he doesn’t care what he does, but he definitely doesn’t want to work for “uber” anymore.
This is how we do it.
No “all-in clauses” for average earners
All-in agreements were originally intended for top earners such as top managers.
They also have their justification there.
But for the majority of employees, this scam should not exist.
Only those who earn at least 5,220 euros gross (maximum contribution basis) per month should be allowed to have such clauses in their contract.
Prohibition of “sunset clauses”
These clauses deprive employees of the salary and wages to which they are entitled.
Prohibition of “competition clauses”
In a competitive economy, non-compete clauses are counterproductive.
They limit people’s job opportunities and, what’s more, exacerbate the shortage of skilled workers.
A better status for platform workers
We want to create a separate status for “crowdworkers” because they are not sufficiently protected under labor law.
Austria could thus be a pioneer for a European directive.
The Temporary Employment Act (AÜG) can serve as a model for such a “platform work law”.
Such a law should clarify the responsibilities of the platform and clients, as well as facilitate the enforcement of the rights of platform employees, the handling of customer ratings and the prohibition of certain contractual clauses.
We work fairly. Train instead of suppressing wages.
A low-wage sector was to be created in Austria: In the first year of the turquoise-blue coalition, more workers came to Austria from abroad than ever before.
At the same time, the Kurz government has made major cuts in integration and qualifications.
We want good work for everyone in Austria.
Education and training can make us all stronger; we do not want to compete with each other to the bottom.
In 2018, immigration into the Austrian labor market was at its highest - under a turquoise-blue government.
54,380 people have come from abroad to work for us.
That is more than in 1990, the year of the opening of the East.
Kurz, Strache and Kickl wanted to create a low-wage sector in Austria: officially they incited hatred against migrants, but discreetly they brought in workers from abroad to increase wage pressure.
The 12-hour day and shorter rest periods in the hospitality industry have pushed many Austrians out of the catering industry.
Replacements are being sought abroad.
Since then, around 1,000 fewer Austrians have worked in tourism, while the number of foreigners employed has increased by around 5,100.
The turquoise-blue coalition has decided by law that more skilled workers can be brought in from abroad.
They also plan to reduce the minimum wage for skilled workers by 20 percent.
This puts pressure on all skilled workers’ wages in Austria.
Our vision: good training and fair work
Before we bring people from abroad into our labor market, we must provide good training for the people who live here and place them in jobs.
In Austria, work is done fairly.
The 52-year-old cook from Burgenland must not be displaced by young workers from Hungary.
The rules on the labour market and the right qualification measures must ensure this.
While the turquoise-blue coalition has cut job programs, we want to invest in the qualification of people here instead of bringing in cheap labor from third countries.
It pays off: every euro invested in the labor market has paid for itself after just 5 years.
13 percent less funding for job programs
Integration allowances Requalification German courses
Job programs for minimum income recipients Nursing training Social enterprises Specialist training
Vocational rehabilitation support for returnees
Inter-company apprenticeship training Part-time education Educational leave
This is how we do it.
Labour market assessment: integration before immigration
We want to reintroduce labour market testing in sectors with particularly high unemployment.
We also want to change EU law.
Companies must first inquire with the AMS if they want to recruit workers from outside Austria.
If we have a suitable person, they must be given priority.
Red-White-Red Card
No skilled work at dumping prices.
The minimum wage for skilled workers who come to Austria via the Red-White-Red Card must not be reduced by 20 percent, as planned by the turquoise-blue coalition.
Qualify and integrate, don’t compete
We need to invest more money in training programs again.
The cuts at the AMS must be reversed.
The training and retraining program for skilled workers in nursing is particularly important.
The need for nursing staff will increase and many unemployed people will be given a perspective.
( --> Intensive training for skilled workers, p. 101 )
Reintroduce the integration year
The government has cancelled the integration year, we want to reintroduce it.
Asylum seekers are to be trained, learn German and work for a year.
In this way, asylum seekers become familiar with our work culture and then find it easier to enter the job market.
This prevents asylum seekers from ending up on minimum social security.
Abolish long-term unemployment
A job guarantee for meaningful activities
Unemployment costs us joy of life, health and money: unemployment currently costs us 8 billion euros.
In addition, there are physical and psychological problems among the unemployed and the loss of professional skills.
We want to abolish long-term unemployment – ​​there are enough jobs: whether in an e-taxi or in production – subsidized jobs bring more to everyone than long periods without employment.
In Austria, there are still almost 100,000 more people unemployed than before the 2008 crisis.
Every fourth employee in Austria is unemployed at least once a year.
The older you get, the more of a problem this becomes: while unemployment is declining in all other age groups, unemployment in the 50+ age group has recently risen again.
They find it particularly difficult to find work again – many of them have been unemployed for far longer than a year.
This can happen to anyone and has serious consequences: loneliness, depression, health problems and a strained family life.
Nevertheless, the turquoise-blue government has cancelled the 20,000 job campaign for older unemployed people.
It would have halved unemployment among those over 50 and cost just 150 euros more per employee than their unemployment.
Our vision is full employment by 2030
Every euro we invest in active labour market policy has already paid for itself after 5 years – we must do more to combat unemployment and its consequences for people.
We want to halve unemployment by 2025 and restore full employment by 2030.
Long-term unemployed people should receive a job guarantee, also to ensure good pensions in old age.
This is only possible with a bold plan.
This is how we do it.
End of long-term unemployment through real job guarantee
In Austria, no one should be unemployed for longer than a year.
We want to extend the 20,000 employment campaign to all long-term unemployed.
There is enough to do.
Schools, communities and district offices need support.
This costs Austria only 150 euros per person per month more than the unemployment of these people.
Action 20,000 protects our climate
Former long-term unemployed people can take elderly and sick people to the doctor, pharmacy or supermarket in an e-taxis.
This will be funded through a special funding program from the newly created Climate Protection Fund.
Anyone who has a 1-2-3 climate ticket can travel by e-taxi for free.
Economic stimulus package:
Economic growth in Austria is declining again. The number of unemployed also threatens to rise. The economy must therefore be stabilized quickly. We need an economic stimulus package: reduce income tax as of January 1, 2020, abolish VAT on rents and provide investment incentives for companies through temporary early depreciation and important investments in education and social security.
From: Martina F.
Dear Ms. Dr. Rendi Wagner, I got a great job as part of the 20,000 campaign with a fixed-term contract until June 2019. As of July I will have a permanent employment contract there, yay! It would be nice if this campaign could be revived.
All honor to the teaching.
When they take the path to learn their goal and their dream job, many of them end up in companies and begin an apprenticeship.
They are the skilled workers of tomorrow, whose hard work and performance will advance our economy.
It also helps the apprentices themselves: the better trained they are, the more secure their jobs will be later on.
That is why we want to support apprentices: with more quality training, paid leave after completing their apprenticeship and a free driving license.
Over 107,000 young people are currently doing an apprenticeship in Austria.
In the future, they will work in metal technology, in sales, in hotels and restaurants.
And they will complete residential buildings.
Companies rely on them and our everyday lives would not function without skilled workers.
That is why it is so important to us that more young people find an apprenticeship, receive good training and enjoy their jobs.
We know that being well-educated makes it easier for everyone to find a job that allows them to live well – and to be able to change jobs flexibly if they want to.
However, those who have only completed compulsory schooling have a harder time.
No matter what statistics we look at about job seekers, those who do not have further education are particularly likely to be unemployed – and remain so for longer.
About half of all job seekers have completed compulsory schooling at most.
A few years ago, we took an important step by making training compulsory to ensure that young people are trained and qualified.
Thanks to compulsory training, they stay in school longer or do an apprenticeship.
Nevertheless, we are currently seeing a trend that we cannot ignore: in recent years, the total number of apprentices has decreased.
The proportion of boys and girls of teaching age has also fallen, which explains the decline.
Nevertheless, we know that companies in Austria – whether in wood processing, gastronomy, offices or banks – are looking for and need skilled workers.
They are the greatest asset to a company.
That is why we want apprenticeships and training to be seen even more by young people as what they are: a great investment in their own future!
Apprentices in Austria
Source: WKÖ apprenticeship statistics
129,899
130 120 110 100 90
107,915
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Burgenland 2,521 Carinthia 7,121 Lower Austria 16,154 Upper Austria 23,160 Salzburg 8,422 Styria 15,603 Tyrol 10,871 Vorarlberg 7,164 Vienna 16,899
But apprenticeships as an educational path face strong competition.
A university degree is often seen as superior to an apprenticeship in terms of public perception, paycheck, career opportunities and what many parents want for their child.
This imbalance needs to be corrected.
The apprenticeship qualification as an educational qualification is at a disadvantage compared to school qualifications.
For example, obtaining a master's degree or repeating an apprenticeship examination is subject to a fee, while school and university studies are largely free of charge.
In addition to the master craftsman's examination, a high school diploma or university entrance qualification examination is also required for admission to university.
Our vision: apprenticeships that are fun – careers that provide security
We want everyone to be able to learn their dream job and receive the best possible training in companies and vocational schools.
This also includes ensuring that vocational schools are technically up to date, that apprentices have time to relax and that trainers are well trained in pedagogy.
We want apprentices to enter the professional world with joy and confidence.
This is how we do it.
Good working conditions in the companies:
Apprentices are workers whose rights must be protected.
For example, a company may not demand prohibited overtime from them – this requires stricter controls and sanctions if there are violations.
The 12-hour day is particularly problematic for apprentices.
Because they need time to learn and relax.
Fair pay:
It is often difficult to make ends meet with apprenticeship pay.
That is why we want apprentices to receive at least 850 euros from the first year of their apprenticeship.
We support the union in achieving this within the framework of collective agreements.
Free driving license:
Apprentices should be given the opportunity to obtain a driving license free of charge as part of their vocational training.
Language month for apprentices:
Free language courses abroad should also be available for apprentices to continue their education.
The Chamber of Commerce could become active here and promote this among its member companies and take over the organization.
Everyone benefits from specialists with good foreign language skills!
Free and faster apprenticeship final examination:
One in four apprentices abandons their training or fails the final exam.
This is also due to a lack of support from companies.
This is about to change – the path to successfully completing an apprenticeship is about to become easier.
How does that work?
With a legal right to a final apprenticeship examination within one month of leaving vocational school – so that what has been learned can be demonstrated straight away.
In addition, the exam itself should be free of charge, even if it is repeated!
Examiners should be released from duty.
Apprenticeship completion holiday: A successful completion should be rewarded!
Apprentices should be able to go on an apprenticeship graduation trip.
That’s why we want a week of paid leave to complete an apprenticeship.
Free master examination:
Like the Matura, the master craftsman’s examination should also be free of charge.
Competency checks for exam preparation:
We want regular reviews of apprentices’ training progress.
This is intended to improve preparation for the final apprenticeship examination.
More training for trainers:
Especially in small companies there is not always enough time for apprentices and their training.
The quality of the trainers also varies.
In order to ensure the quality of training, we want to provide regular pedagogical training for the trainees.
Apprenticeship support when the quality of training is assured:
The apprenticeship subsidies currently paid to all training companies are to be linked to quality criteria.
In the final year, the funding will only be paid out after the apprenticeship final examination has been successfully completed.
More support for small businesses:
The increased funds for company apprenticeship support are to be used specifically for small training companies in order to support training plans, social problems in the company and the individual training steps.
More time for Matura preparation:
With the “Apprenticeship with Matura” program, we have created the opportunity to combine an apprenticeship and a Matura – and then start a degree course.
To make this easier, apprentices should have a legal right to educational leave in order to be able to prepare for the Matura examination.
Easier access to study:
Completion of the apprenticeship qualifies you to take the entrance examination.
In subjects where access is restricted, a positive entrance examination should be sufficient for admission to the course.
At universities of applied sciences, the apprenticeship qualification should also be sufficient to apply for a place at university.
For all courses of study without access restrictions, the Matura or the Berufsreifeprüfung remains the entry requirement.
Bringing Internet & Co to every vocational school and every company:
Too many training locations are not digital, there is no or poor internet and too few modern devices for working.
We want vocational schools to be equipped with tablets and Wi-Fi.
We must adapt vocational schools to the requirements of the 21st century.
More permeability between school and apprenticeship:
School time should be better credited towards apprenticeships and apprenticeships should be better credited towards school time.
This means more flexible training paths.
500 apprentices in the public service:
The public service should set a good example in terms of skilled worker training and take on 500 new apprentices.
Stop deportations for asylum seekers in training:
Asylum seekers should be able to complete an apprenticeship in a shortage occupation in Austria.
Asylum seekers in apprenticeships should have the opportunity to complete their training.
It makes no sense to deport well-integrated people
and instead to bring foreigners who are not yet integrated to Austria.
More places in the skilled worker intensive training:
There are to be 10,000 more places for intensive training of skilled workers.
As part of this training, job-seeking unskilled workers have the opportunity to complete a complete apprenticeship in a compressed period of time.
Currently, around 4,700 people are completing such training.
The aim of the offensive is to reduce the list of shortage occupations, i.e. those occupations where foreigners from third countries are admitted as skilled workers, to zero.
Second training opportunity for everyone – qualification allowance New:
We offer everyone in Austria a second chance at training – even in adulthood.
For the duration of the training, a scholarship will be paid in the amount of the fictitious unemployment benefit.
A well-educated population is the foundation of any country’s economic development.
Jobs that are good for the climate and employees
Rising heat makes our everyday life difficult.
Running errands is exhausting, and older people in particular suffer from the high temperatures.
But the heat is also a danger for employees!
Dehydration, dizziness and work accidents are consequences of the climate crisis.
That is why we will protect our workers and invest in climate-fit jobs.
In Austria, more people now die from heat than in traffic accidents.
In 2018, there were 766 heat-related deaths.
Farmers complain about poor harvests.
People who work outdoors suffer from the blazing sun.
Elderly people, parents of small children and pregnant women cannot leave their apartments and houses because the heat endangers their health.
And then there are those people who have to work outside in the summer – delivering goods, carrying furniture, working on scaffolding, paving roads, cleaning facades.
They are particularly at risk from heat because they have to exert themselves physically.
“The asphalt is 200 degrees. Our construction workers are physically exhausted at 55. If they have to work 12 hours a day on a regular basis, they will never be able to reach retirement age in good health.”
PORR works council member Peter Grandits on the reality of work in construction
A construction worker died this year in Zurndorf in Burgenland.
He collapsed while at work and could not be saved.
Climate change is already having noticeable consequences from which we must protect people in Austria.
We also want to make an impact in the world of work.
Work must not endanger anyone’s life.
For us, this means: shorter working hours, climate-adapted work spaces
and – so that we do not further fuel the climate crisis – more investment in public transport and green jobs.
Our vision: jobs and transport that protect the climate and thus also people
For us, employee protection comes before profit!
That is why workplaces and working hours should be designed to protect health.
And the way to work?
Should be managed in the most climate-friendly way possible.
This is how we do it.
Commuter allowance with climate bonus:
We also want commuting to become fairer and more climate-friendly.
If you have a long way to go to work, you have to pay travel costs.
How much commuter allowance you receive currently depends on your income.
That is about to change.
Even those with a low income should receive as much commuter allowance as a high earner.
And while it is currently a disadvantage for employees to use public transport, this is precisely what should be encouraged.
They should get the “big” flat rate if they travel to work by bus, tram or train instead of by car!
The 1-2-3 climate ticket for Austria:
In Vorarlberg and Vienna you can travel on public transport for one euro a day.
This should be available for the whole of Austria for rail and local transport: with an annual ticket for 3 euros a day throughout Austria, for 2 euros a day through 3 federal states and for 1 euro a day for public transport within the federal state.
The whole thing is to be financed from the Climate Protection Fund.
In addition, we want to expand alternative means of transport such as regional shared taxis and improve the framework conditions for cycling and walking.
More investment in public transport:
No more diesel locomotives!
That is why we want to invest more than one billion in electrifying railway lines over the next five years.
This will enable us to save hundreds of thousands of tons of CO2.
And: Electrification creates jobs!
100 million for e-bikes, e-taxis and more:
To make getting to train stations easier, we want to invest in shuttle services, e-taxis and e-bikes.
Anyone who has the 1-2-3 climate ticket should be able to use these services free of charge.
25 degrees at work is enough:
From 25 degrees, employers should be obliged to protect their employees specifically from heat.
This includes making fans or air conditioning available, installing blinds and insulating business buildings.
In addition, there will be additional paid breaks on construction sites.
On hot days, working hours should be limited to a maximum of 8 hours.
If the temperature rises above 32 degrees, work should be stopped.
If it is not possible to keep the room temperature below 30 degrees through structural, organizational or technical measures, paid time off due to heat must be granted.
Legal entitlement to a 4-day week:
Shorter working weeks are not only good for work-life balance, they also benefit our climate.
Because a 4-day week also means less CO2.
Specifically: 20 percent fewer greenhouse gases produced by commuting.
A Green New Deal for Austria:
Essentially, climate policy is about moving away from small, individual strategies and instead reorienting entire industries, transport routes and jobs in an ecological way.
This should work with investments: expanding public transport routes;
Convert residential and industrial buildings to be energy efficient;
“Eco-upgrades” for companies to help them emit fewer greenhouse gases.
In addition, climate-friendly jobs should be promoted.
Re-qualification initiatives should be launched immediately for employees in those economic sectors that are currently dependent on fossil fuels, so that a fair transition to a climate-friendly economic system is possible, especially for the employees.
What do women earn? Fair wages, of course!
Performing well every day, functioning well every day – and yet the number on the pay slip is smaller than that of the male colleague next door.
For many women this is a bitter reality.
And this despite the fact that hardly anyone would openly say that women should earn less, simply for no reason.
Some people have further explanations: “Yes, it’s because of part-time work and maternity leave.
This will take its toll on income.”
But let’s take a closer look.
If you compare the hourly wages of men and women, they earn 20 percent less.
Even women who work full-time all year round earn less than their male colleagues: a full 15.6 percent less.
Interestingly, there is a strong urban-rural divide in wage inequality.
In rural areas, women are more likely to work in low-paying service jobs and childcare facilities are less available.
In Vienna, the salary difference between men and women is the smallest – it is 6 percent.
The salary difference is highest in Vorarlberg at 24.7 percent.
The good news: the wage gap is gradually closing.
But unfortunately much too slow.
At the current pace, women will have to wait until 2050 for equal pay in Austria.
Do we seriously want to subject women to this?
We say: No!
Women get less
The difference is smallest in Vienna:
-24.7%
The difference is most pronounced in Vorarlberg:
Statistics Austria, gross annual earnings of full-time employees.
In 2018, Iceland passed a law banning women from being paid less for the same work.
The Equal Pay Act requires companies to prove that they pay their employees fairly.
Those who pay women less are punished.
Our vision: No more talking about the wage gap
It's that simple: men and women should be paid equally for the same work.
We cannot and do not want to wait until 2050.
That is why we want a law that guarantees equal pay for equal work.
What works in Iceland can also work in Austria.
Already achieved: The full recognition of the waiting periods in the job. It brings mothers thousands of euros.
To: Social Democratic Party of Austria
By: Monika P.
The constant pressure makes you sick, whether it is the fear of losing your job, you often go to work despite being sick, ruining your health even more and after 10 years it is a psychological
and physical wreckage, or the constant time pressure and pressure to perform, often for starvation wages. Prime examples: nursing, call center agents, shift workers and much more. Especially for women, where there is also the family and relatives to care for, who are almost always
the women because there is not enough money for external care.
This is how we do it.
“Equal Pay Act” for Austria:
Paying women less than men is wage dumping.
Since January 2018, a law has been in force in Iceland that prohibits companies from paying women less than men for equal work.
The first of its kind in the world.
We need such a law in Austria too!
More self-determination, easier compatibility:
How women work depends on many factors.
They are usually the ones who stay with children when there are not enough childcare places.
They are the ones who care for their relatives.
They are the ones who work part-time instead of full-time.
We want women to be able to work more independently.
For us, this means developing working time models.
Everyone should have a legal right to switch from full-time to part-time work and vice versa – and a legal right to a childcare place from the child’s first year of life.
50% of AMS funds for women:
The ÖVP and FPÖ have cut funding for women seeking jobs.
We want half of the AMS funds to be used for women so that they can gain a better foothold in the job market!
What do women earn? Fair pensions, of course!
Lower pay, part-time work and insufficient childcare: all of these things have a negative impact on women’s incomes.
The situation is even more dramatic when it comes to pensions.
Men’s pensions are almost twice as high as those of women.
Many women even only receive the minimum pension.
This must finally change!
How?
More self-determination in choosing a job and better recognition of child-rearing.
In recent years, the average pension for men has increased more than that for women.
In 2007, female pensioners still received 66 percent of the pensions of men.
In 2017, it was only 63 percent.
Currently, women receive on average about 42.3 percent less pension than men.
In absolute terms, men’s pensions average 1,920 euros, while women receive only 1,100 euros.
The pension gap is twice as wide as the income gap – despite the minimum pension.
And while the income gap is slowly narrowing, the pension gap between the sexes is widening again.
In 2018, 8 out of 10 part-time positions were filled by women.
In other words, every second woman works part-time.
Both the income level and the number of months of contributions are relevant for the amount of the pension.
Women perform worse on both factors.
The pension insurance calculates a classic old-age pension per contributor with 540 months of contributions.
Only 26 percent of women reach this time period, but 55 percent of men do.
This has consequences when women reach retirement age and is also reflected in minimum pensions.
Our vision: Those who work must receive a decent pension
We will only be satisfied when there is no longer an income or pension gap between men and women.
And we want no one to be afraid of growing old – because everyone knows that they will receive a pension from which they can live comfortably.
This also means that no one should be penalized for periods of job searching or years of part-time work.
In the future, the phases in which you earn less should have less of an impact on the amount of your pension.
To: Social Democratic Party
From: Michaela A.
So. I have always worked full time. My children were the first and the last to be picked up. That was the price I paid for getting a decent pension. If I work part-time, I have to be aware that my pension will be less. And I say this as a Social Democrat.
This is how we do it.
Increase women’s pensions – through better recognition of childcare:
Improved recognition of child-rearing periods (instead of 110 euros, now 160 euros per month)
50 euros gross more every month in retirement
750,000 pensioners benefit.
This should apply to women and men who are raising children.
Around 750,000 pensioners will benefit from this measure.
Even people who are already retired should receive this extra pension as a lump sum.
Future pensioners will benefit from the extra pension through increased consideration of child-rearing periods, i.e. through an increase in the contribution basis for child-rearing (2,400 euros per month 14 times per year instead of the current 1,600 euros).
More self-determination, easier compatibility
How women work depends on many factors.
They are usually the ones who stay with children when there are not enough childcare places.
They are the ones who work part-time instead of full-time.
They are the ones who care for their relatives.
We want women to be able to work more independently.
For us, this means developing working time models: ones that deserve the name.
Everyone should have a legal right to switch from full-time to part-time work and vice versa – and a legal right to a childcare place from the child’s first year of life.
Away with the low-wage sector and precarious employment - this will also ensure good pensions.
A large low-wage sector and precarious employment are damaging the pension system.
The most important thing is therefore fairly paid employment.
The number of “atypical employment relationships” has increased rapidly: part-time work, fixed-term employment contracts and temporary employment are now widespread.
For many young people, working life does not begin with regular work and a fair income, but with poorly paid or unpaid internships.
Even if work is done for training purposes in the sense of acquiring practical experience, it is still work.
In case of doubt, internships must be considered employment contracts: the employer must prove the opposite.
Compulsory internships for schools, technical colleges and universities are also employment relationships - we have to ensure this legally.
Together with the social partners, we must ensure fair pay for internships.
In order to prevent those affected from having to take legal action against their employers themselves, interest groups must be given the opportunity to bring a collective action to establish the employment relationship or to enforce any claims resulting from it.
In addition, there needs to be a pension guarantee and a pension without deductions after 45 years of insurance.
Austria should become a model country in education
Actually, it would be totally easy to offer our children the best school.
You learn from others what works particularly well.
And you apply on a large scale what you have developed in your own schools and school experiments and what has proven to be successful.
In fact, it would be easy, but it is difficult because all adults have had their own formative experiences and many of them, even if they hated school, believe that this is the way it has to be.
It doesn't have to.
Because what we expect from children is also what we must demand from schools: that they learn and develop further.
Of course, schools do that.
There are more than 120,000 teachers who do their best every day.
Education policy should support this.
Because the 1.1 million students in the 55,000 classes in Austria deserve the best teaching.
We believe that schools must be organized around children and young people.
You have to be the focus.
The teachers know that learning and teaching are always social processes.
Children are not vessels into which one can indoctrinate content from a canon of subjects.
Schools help children to develop their thirst for knowledge, to channel it, to learn how to learn and to understand the world that is constantly expanding around them.
Unfortunately, school policy over the last two years has sought a different focus.
The focus was not on the children, but on an idea that was born out of political marketing and has nothing to do with the reality of schools and today's pedagogy: the "cuddly pedagogy" must stop.
Subtext: Children need discipline, all students (there are no female students) look fearfully at the blackboard!
Six-year-olds are given numerical grades, eight-year-olds are to be treated with planned “entrance exams” - talent checks.
“In the countries with the best education systems, the claim is that every student can learn, and it is the task of the educational institution to find out: How does this student learn and what can we do to support him?” Andreas Schleicher
The idea of ​​the Ibiza coalition was: children cannot learn to divide early enough.
This is all pretty stupid and anti-child.
Tür-kis-Blau's policies sort children and their life chances according to the income and status of their parents.
This is a step backwards: the black pedagogy of punishment and threats has no place in modern classrooms.
Our vision: Every child can become anything with us.
Every child has the right to a successful life; every child can become anything with us.
Every child is equally valuable.
Every child has the right to the best education.
It is our duty to ensure that children have this right.
The children need our support to become what they can be.
Our educational institutions – kindergartens, schools, apprenticeships, technical colleges and universities – can do so much more if we let them.
To: Social Democratic Party of Austria
By: Susanne G.
I grew up with my mother and grandmother, there was no father - together they ran a tobacco shop, they didn't have much time for me, but they tried very hard. I was a wimp at school and barely managed to pass my A-levels after several rounds of mistakes, but then somehow I got it. But it would never have been financially viable for me to study if I had had to pay for it, as I certainly would not have been able to do any further training - the fact that I have a good job as an academic today is thanks to the achievements that the SPÖ has largely championed, which is why I still vote for them today.
This is how we do it.
Education begins with the youngest:
That is why we want Austria-wide standards for kindergartens with highly qualified teachers as well as clearly defined pedagogical and organizational standards (creation of a uniform quality framework).
We also want better pay for kindergarten teachers and training for elementary school teachers at university level.
In addition, we finally need to implement the second compulsory free year of kindergarten and the legal right to a childcare place from the first year of life.
Digitalization - from free textbooks to free tablets:
In the future, every pupil in the lower grades (5th grade) will receive a free tablet and in the upper grades (9th grade) a laptop.
In addition, teachers must also be equipped with appropriate digital hardware and schools across the board (compulsory and federal schools) must be connected to broadband Internet and equipped with functional Wi-Fi.
However, equipment alone is not enough: teachers must be appropriately trained.
Digital skills must be a mandatory part of teacher training and continuing education.
In classes, digital literacy is an essential part of the curriculum; digital educational media are the future of teaching.
Abolition of traditional school subjects:
The Austrian school system is characterized by the imparting of knowledge in rigidly separated subjects.
In the future, however, what will be required is more than just pure knowledge, the ability to apply knowledge, think in a networked manner, question things critically and find solutions outside of established paths.
In order to be able to impart such skills, schools must say goodbye to the classic canon of subjects.
Modern teaching is oriented towards real-life topics and dealing with complex issues.
We are increasingly relying on social intelligence.
Ethics classes for all provide a framework for qualified discussion and are also a contribution to political education and the development of solid values.
School is the appropriate place to discuss social issues in an orderly environment.
The experience of social responsibility, social cohesion and civil society initiatives must be strengthened.
The best teachers:
Our goal is to attract the most suitable, motivated and best-trained teachers.
Their commitment, skills and enthusiasm have a significant impact on the school climate and the learning success of children and young people.
The current admission procedures for teaching studies should therefore be reformed so that motivation and suitability for this profession are central criteria.
We are also building on better training (increasing the practical component of studies, implementing specialist areas for secondary school such as: scientific subjects becoming “science”, digital skills and modern teaching methods; international mobility of prospective teachers; intercultural skills).
The employment law for teachers is also to be fundamentally revised (60 hours of personal training per year, harmonisation of employment law, common standards for teaching obligations and further and advanced training).
The school administration should be given greater autonomy to shape school priorities and the composition of the teaching staff.
Modern school organization:
At the federal level alone, in the last legislative period, in addition to the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (for issues of integration), the Ministry of Family Affairs (childcare) and the Ministry of Agriculture (agricultural and forestry schools) were entrusted with responsibility in the field of education.
We want legislation and enforcement from a single source and therefore the responsibilities to be pooled in one education department.
In addition, there is a need for nationwide control of educational objectives and a uniform school sponsorship.
Expansion of universities:
More and more young people want to study in Austria, which is more than encouraging.
However, due to the further access restrictions introduced by the turquoise-blue coalition, around 20,000 study places are missing and have been cut.
The promised expansion of the universities of applied sciences sector, however, is meager: 4,500 additional study places at universities of applied sciences by 2023 do not come close to compensating for the cuts in the university sector.
In addition, the FH sector lacks the necessary planning security because a long-term financing commitment for the expansion was refused.
There is a need for a rapid expansion of university of applied sciences places and financial security for the courses.
There is a shortage of highly qualified workers, especially in the STEM fields.
To counteract this, we want 5,000 additional training places at universities and technical colleges.
Making Austria a land of opportunities
Unfortunately, it is nothing new, but the fact that every educational study diagnoses the same shortcoming does not make it any better: education is inherited in Austria.
We say: every child is equally valuable.
Every child deserves the best support.
Let’s make Austria a land of opportunities!
Children in this country do not have the same opportunities; their background often determines which educational career they will pursue and thus also which profession they can pursue.
In Austria, educational paths already diverge at the age of ten.
It is very easy to predict who will go to high school after primary school, then graduate and later go on to attend university: they are those whose parents had a similar educational career.
The 2018 National Education Report therefore examines whether school choice can be explained by differences in performance.
However, the relationship between school choice and performance, especially after primary school, is relatively weak.
For example: If the students have the same level of competence in reading comprehension, children of academics are much more likely to enter an AHS than children whose parents have an apprenticeship qualification.
International examples show that this does not have to remain the case: in Shanghai, the most socially disadvantaged children sometimes perform better in PISA than the wealthiest children in European or American cities.
The poorest ten percent of students in Vietnam and Estonia perform better on PISA than the richest ten percent in most Latin American countries.
For OECD education expert Andreas Schleicher, many conclusions from international comparisons are obvious: none of the top PISA countries divides students into higher and lower-performing students, none separates them early, and the same applies to repeating a grade.
The best educational systems are those that offer all students equal learning opportunities and in which teachers believe in the potential of every student.
By separating children early after primary school, we create a great deal of stress not only for the parents, but also for the children and the teachers.
However, learning opportunities often depend on the financial strength of the parents: According to a study by the Institute for Empirical Social Research (IFES), around 14% of Austrian students took advantage of paid tutoring in the 2016/17 school year.
Nationwide, their parents have spent around 100 million euros on paid tutoring for their children.
However, it would be problematic to respond to students' difficulties by lowering requirements instead of offering learning environments with the most modern pedagogy or more remedial teaching.
Our vision: Every child gets every chance
Let’s make Austria a land of opportunities!
It is our duty to encourage curiosity and joy in learning in every child in Austria.
We do not want to accept that every year a whole bunch of geniuses start out in our schools and after a few years all that remains are frustrated young people who have been told by their parents that they are less valuable in our society and that they are stupider than the children of academics.
This is how we do it.
Childcare that parents can rely on all year round:
We want a legal right to a free childcare place from the first year of life.
To this end, we want an expansion offensive for kindergartens - nationwide, high quality, open all day, fewer closing days and publicly financed.
This applies not only to a place in a kindergarten, but later also to a place in a full-day school within a radius of 20 km.
Parents also need a reliable childcare offer during the holidays.
We want schools to offer this to parents who need it.
Teachers, teaching trainees and leisure educators will be involved in this process.
The 35,000 students who have to take a re-examination in the fall will receive free learning support.
Expansion of all-day schools and free lunches:
Successful education systems such as Canada or Estonia are leading the way: here, school without a backpack is a matter of course.
In all-day school forms, work blocks alternate with breaks and exercise phases.
The idea behind it: children learn not only in class, but also through conversations with their classmates.
We therefore want to further expand all-day schools; this is the only way we can speak of real freedom of choice for parents.
We also want free lunch for all children.
Homework is done at school, parents no longer have to argue with their children in the afternoon about doing their homework.
And this has positive effects on learning outcomes: all-day schooling not only improves the compatibility of family and work,
They also reduce the need for, and therefore the expense of, tutoring.
The number of students who fail a year is reduced from an average of 8.4 percent to 1.4 percent in the integrated all-day school.
For those students who still have to take a re-examination in the fall, we demand free learning support in the summer.
+5,000 teachers where they are most needed (Opportunity Index):
Only 6 out of 10 pupils in the 4th grade of primary school can read with comprehension – children whose first language is not German often have difficulties here.
Those who need help learning do not receive the support they need.
Because at the moment it makes no difference where a school is located or what particular challenges the school is facing.
In doing so, we are leaving children behind, jeopardising their integration and blocking their future employment opportunities.
We want to distribute the funds according to actual needs.
The so-called “opportunity index” is used for this purpose.
The greater the problems at a school, the more teachers will be deployed in the future.
This creates a need for around 5,000 additional teachers, whom we want to distribute across Austria according to these criteria.
Integration package for schools:
Children who do not speak German obviously do not have an easy time at school.
Cultural diversity also presents challenges for schools.
Nevertheless, it does not help to just problematize this and do nothing about it - or even to cut funds for integration measures, as unfortunately happened under the Ibiza coalition.
We want to reverse the cuts immediately and re-establish an integration fund for schools.
We need additional language teachers and teams of psychologists and social workers to promote the development of all students – including those without a migration background.
We want every child living in Austria to have the same opportunities, regardless of where they or their parents come from.
To do this, we need to provide better support to those with language, learning or social difficulties.
The sooner a child with a migration background speaks German, the better.
We therefore want two compulsory, free years of kindergarten for early language development.
Integration through school also involves parents.
An important step towards this is the development of uniform criteria for cooperative parent work in schools.
This includes, for example, being able to use the school library just like their children.
No stress when choosing a school:
The early separation of children from primary school to high school or middle school not only has a negative impact on the children's chances, but above all causes one thing: stress for parents and children: Does my child have good enough grades to get a place in high school?
Where does your best friend go after fourth grade?
Which type of school is most suitable for my child and does it fit with their individual ideas and wishes?
We want to spare everyone this stress: because it is not only completely unnecessary from a school perspective (international comparisons show that countries with shared schools, such as Finland, regularly rank at the top of the PISA results), but above all from the personal perspective of the children.
We therefore want a common school for 6 to 14 year olds.
Private schools, whose teaching staff are financed by the public sector, accept a percentage of children from socio-economically disadvantaged families that is adjusted to the region.
Measures against bullying and violence in schools:
Unfortunately, over the last year there have been increasing reports of violence and bullying among students or between students and teachers, and vice versa.
This requires comprehensive measures.
The main aim is to provide additional support staff for teachers so that they do not have to be psychologists and/or social workers in addition.
We therefore call for 100 additional school psychologists.
In order to further strengthen the class structure and school climate, we also want to further expand peer mediation programs in which young people are trained to become school prefects.
They often recognize earlier than teachers when conflicts arise in their class or at school.
In this way, conflict situations between students or between students and teachers can be identified and addressed before they escalate.
Safe route to school:
The tragic death of a 9-year-old boy who was run over by a truck on a zebra crossing on his way to school at the beginning of the year not only caused deep sadness, but also made it clear: Our routes to school are not safe!
Such accidents could be prevented by a simple measure: equipping all trucks with mandatory turning assistants.
The warning system compensates for the blind spot.
Already 15% of trucks on Europe’s roads are equipped with one.
In order to make school routes safe in Austria, we urgently want the introduction of a mandatory turning assistant.
This is the only way to prevent fatal accidents on the way to school.
Free access to higher education:
The latest OECD study “Education at a Glance 2018” has once again shown that our higher education system is highly selective – children whose parents did not go to university themselves are at a disadvantage when it comes to accessing higher education.
And yet, since 2018, working students have had to pay tuition fees again – precisely those high achievers who are confronted with the daily challenge of balancing study and work.
This must be reversed immediately.
We are in favor of open and free access to higher education and better social security so that people from all social classes have the opportunity to study.
Learning for life.
We send our children to school for at least nine years, and yet companies complain that young people who apply to them for apprenticeships cannot read, write or do math well enough.
And more than 1,100 students each year do not complete secondary school successfully after completing compulsory education.
Can we take note of this with a shrug of the shoulders, because it is “only” 1.3 percent of each year group?
No!
Looking for work at the age of 15 without a school qualification is a situation that many young people - understandably - cannot cope with.
Something has to be done.
Because we know the situation on the labor market.
What we are looking for above all are well-trained specialists.
Many of the unskilled jobs of yesterday are now either done abroad or by machines and robots.
We cannot and must not let young people leave school without at least basic skills.
Even if these young people start an apprenticeship later, it is difficult to make up for such deficits.
This means that something has to change in our school system.
And this generally applies to the transition from school to work.
Young people who do not attend secondary school and begin an apprenticeship have to make a career decision quite early, namely at the age of 15.
At the same time, they are made to understand that in times of rapidly changing labor markets, there are no longer any professions or jobs that one can do for a lifetime.
That is why we need to and want to provide much better support to young people in their career decisions.
Our vision: At the end of school there will be young, self-confident people who are able to shape their lives according to their own wishes and ideas.
Compulsory education ends when the school has fulfilled its duty and the young people have the necessary skills to graduate successfully.
School should not be seen as pointless, where only after school do you realise why it was actually quite smart to learn one thing or another.
School should certainly not degenerate into a pointless waste of time.
At the end of school, students should be young, self-confident people who are able to shape their lives according to their own wishes and ideas.
But one thing is clear: young people cannot leave school without being able to read, write and do arithmetic sufficiently.
This is how we do it.
Linking compulsory schooling to educational goals:
In the future, compulsory schooling will no longer end with nine years of school attendance, but only with the successful completion of the 8th grade.
Repeating the course is possible until a positive school leaving certificate is achieved (however, the obligation ends automatically at the age of 18).
At the same time, the obligation to complete training until the age of 18 and the guarantee of training until the age of 25 continue to apply: every young person in Austria is expected to obtain an educational qualification that goes beyond compulsory schooling.
Cuts to the training guarantee made by the turquoise-blue federal government will be reversed immediately.
More flexibility for educational choices – introduction of vocational colleges:
Nowadays, career decisions are no longer made for life.
We therefore want to make the vocational training system more permeable and at the same time ensure that every student has the necessary tools for every further educational decision.
For us, a merger of the polytechnic schools and the vocational middle schools into vocational colleges is a conceivable way to bring the school system a little closer to the educational pathways that are already partly real at present.
We want to examine this as part of a feasibility study.
Better career guidance:
Young people are finding it increasingly difficult to plan their own educational and professional careers.
In order to provide them with targeted support in their considerations, compulsory educational and career guidance for all students must be introduced in lower secondary school and (again) in upper secondary school.
From the 5th grade onwards, at least one week per school year should be devoted to the topic of vocational training across all subjects.
This ensures space and time to deal with different career profiles, training courses and personal interests and talents at an early stage.
Cooperation with external platforms and institutions that can convey a breadth of content should be sought.
An individual perspective plan is drawn up for each child, which shows further options.
Furthermore, a career guidance coach will be installed at each school location.
Abolish child poverty
Children should laugh, dream and all doors should be open to them.
Your dreams are our commitment.
In Austria, people affected by poverty die around ten years earlier than the rest of the population.
The bad thing, however, is that the dilemma begins right at the beginning of life: in Austria, poverty is hereditary and therefore “contagious”.
Children who grow up with poor parents wear poorer clothes and are more likely to live in overcrowded, dark and damp apartments, some of which have no heating or bathroom and are poorly equipped: no washing machine, computer or dishwasher.
This child will almost certainly do worse in school and will have a low chance of making it to university because education is still inherited in this country.
This also reduces the chances of getting a good education and a secure job, and the risk of being unemployed later on increases.
Poor children or children at risk of poverty complain more often of stomach aches or headaches and are more likely to engage in health-risk behavior such as unhealthy eating, smoking or less physical activity.
Poor children of today are the chronically ill adults of tomorrow.
And what is the everyday life like for these children?
What is it like to show up at your best friend's birthday party empty-handed because you don't have any money for a present, or to be stressed about the start of school because your parents don't know how to pay for the things you need for the start of school?
And there are also children who cannot play after school but have to care for someone at home. There are 40,000 children and young people in Austria who care for their relatives, even though they are the ones who should be in the role of those being cared for.
This year alone, over 45,000 school starter packages are available, which will be distributed by the Red Cross in cooperation with the Ministry of Social Affairs.
Incidentally, this is an important initiative that we have to thank Rudi Hundstorfer for.
Caritas, Volkshilfe and Diakonie also regularly help families who cannot afford a full school bag for their children at the start of the school year.
So if you think we are talking about children growing up in a developing country, you are wrong.
No, we are talking about Austria, one of the richest countries in the world.
More than 300,000 underage children and young people are at risk of poverty in Austria.
Almost one in five children (19%) lives in a family affected by poverty.
This makes children the population group most affected by poverty.
Single parents and large families are particularly affected.
Almost 40% of single parents with children are affected.
Actually, these are shameful numbers.
But instead of making an effort to get every single child out of poverty, the turquoise-blue federal government has drastically worsened the situation of these children by cutting minimum social security.
“Children should laugh, dream and all doors should be open to them. Your dreams are our commitment.”
Children should laugh instead of be afraid.
Dream instead of being afraid.
See opportunities and perspectives instead of dead ends.
They should not only have the hope that they will one day be better off than their parents, but they should be able to rely on it being so.
Only when every child in Austria has this security will we have properly fulfilled our job as politicians.
Unemployment must not become a poverty trap for families.
We want to increase unemployment benefits and emergency assistance so that they ensure a living.
Our vision: Basic security for children
Every fifth child in Austria today lives in families affected by poverty.
In addition to immediate measures, an overall long-term concept is needed that, in particular, reorganises the patchwork of financial family benefits.
Above all, there is one goal: child poverty must be a thing of the past.
We therefore want to develop a basic child benefit model in the next legislative period.
This is how we do it.
Education offensive
Legal entitlement to a free all-day kindergarten and school place:
Full-day care at school reduces the need for tutoring and also ensures better integration.
There is therefore an urgent need for an expansion and legal entitlement to a full-day, free childcare place from the age of 1 as well as a school place in a full-day school.
Healthy schools: Free healthy lunch and a daily physical education lesson
At around 700 euros per year, school lunches are a financial burden for many families.
However, it cannot be the case that children in Austria whose parents cannot afford it sit with growling stomachs at school or at home doing their homework.
Our children should be able to eat healthy and free food every day.
In addition, lunch has an important social function for our children in schools, helping to overcome social barriers.
The implementation of daily exercise and sports units in all kindergartens and school types is an important contribution to conveying to children and young people the joy and motivation for sport and exercise.
Sport also supports learning by increasing the ability to concentrate.
Sport also makes an important contribution to the health of our children.
Opportunity Index: 5,000 more teachers where they are needed most
Only 6 out of 10 pupils in the 4th grade of primary school can read with comprehension – children whose first language is not German often have difficulties here.
Those who need help learning do not receive the support they need.
Because at the moment it makes no difference where a school is located or what particular challenges the school is facing.
In doing so, we are leaving children behind, jeopardising their integration and blocking their future employment opportunities.
We want to distribute the funds according to actual needs. This is where the so-called “opportunity index” comes into play.
The greater the problems at a school, the more teachers will be deployed in the future.
This creates a need for around 5,000 additional teachers, whom we want to distribute across Austria according to these criteria.
Investing in the health of our children – because poverty makes people sick.
Free and sufficient access to diagnostic and therapeutic services for children and adolescents
Poor children of today are the chronically ill adults of tomorrow.
Due to the lack of availability, children must expect to wait between nine months and one year for therapy options such as speech therapy, occupational therapy or psychotherapy.
Entire regions currently have no psychotherapy services for children.
According to estimates, there is a total shortage of around 60,000 to 80,000 health insurance-funded therapy places (psychotherapy, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, etc.).
However, this has dire consequences.
If a child with developmental delays, for example in language development, is not treated early enough and does not receive care, this leads to significant consequences and disadvantages in later life.
This can never be recovered.
Mental illnesses in early childhood also often have a lasting impact on a child’s life.
This of course hits low-income parents and their children doubly hard, as they cannot “buy” these missing benefits.
We therefore call for the nationwide expansion of the range of therapy places and for health insurance companies to cover the full costs for children.
Emergency financial assistance
Children living in poverty in Austria are dependent on aid packages from the Ministry of Social Affairs, Volkshilfe, Diakonie or Caritas because their parents cannot even afford the bare necessities for the start of school.
This year alone, the Ministry of Social Affairs, together with the Red Cross, is distributing 45,000 school starter packages.
Housing, food, clothing, books, school slippers or exercise books – all of this must be secured regardless of the parents’ income.
Expanding the family bonus to a bonus for all
All those who were excluded by the turquoise-blue federal government should also benefit from the family bonus in the form of a negative tax.
Around ten percent – ​​low earners, especially single parents – are currently not benefiting from the family bonus.
The family bonus has provided little help to low-income families, those who need our help most, while high-income families benefit to the full extent of 1,500 euros per year per child.
Every child should be worth the same, so there needs to be an equal bonus for all families with children, including low-income families.
This will enable us to help 50,000 children out of poverty, and 30,000 single parents and 60,000 couples with children will no longer have to live in poverty.
Reverse cuts to minimum income
The “New Social Assistance” provides that in future there will only be 4.30 euros per day for the second child – and from the third onwards the amount will be reduced to 1.50 euros.
This is not enough to finance healthy food.
Unemployment must not become a poverty trap for families.
We want to increase unemployment benefits and emergency assistance so that they ensure a living.
Introduce maintenance guarantee
Currently, many women and children are left to fend for themselves if maintenance payments are not made.
The consequence: poverty.
The solution is the introduction of the maintenance guarantee, which all parties committed to during the 2017 election campaign.
In order to close the gaps in Austrian maintenance law, we want to introduce a maintenance guarantee for children as a first step, which is reflected in the family allowance system.
This is intended to protect children who receive no or very little maintenance or maintenance advance payments.
Increase in school start-up allowance
Parents spend an average of 855 euros per year on their child's school attendance (not including the cost of lunch), with around 200 euros being spent just at the start of school.
For many parents this is an enormous burden.
That is why the school start-up allowance was introduced in 2011 – 100 euros extra at the start of school.
There has been no adjustment to inflation since then.
Therefore, the school start-up allowance is to be increased from 100 euros to 200 euros.
It cannot be the case that a child has to rely on donations from aid organisations in order to be able to attend school in Austria.
Every child should have a carefree start at school.
Whether with or without disabilities: everyone deserves respect, everyone must be able to live freely
Whether from birth, due to illness or an accident: people with disabilities often experience hurdles in everyday life.
For some, it is difficult to move around and take care of themselves, while others suffer from not being able to get the school or job they want.
And then there are financial worries.
We want everyone to have the chance to develop, to be mobile and to be safe – that’s why we will ensure that Austria becomes more inclusive!
Every 8th person in Austria has problems with mobility.
4 percent of the population have difficulty seeing and over 2 percent have difficulty hearing.
1 percent has learning difficulties.
There are many different forms of impairment – ​​just as the people who live with them are very individual.
But what unites them is the desire for respect, for equality, for freedom – and for inclusion.
Inclusion demands nothing less than that every person is a full member of our society.
To achieve this, institutions and processes must change so that they work for everyone.
And that everyone has a place.
Inclusion is different from integration: integrating a person means helping him or her to find his or her way in an institution or society.
Inclusion, on the other hand, aims to change the institution itself.
And that is exactly what we want.
In 2006, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was adopted by the UN General Assembly.
In 2008, inclusion was declared a human right in this convention.
Nevertheless, there are many construction sites.
Whether there are “personal assistants” depends on the federal state.
The range of mobile services for people with disabilities also varies from state to state.
Public paths and means of transport are still not barrier-free – uneven or narrow paths or steps in trains and trams are simple examples.
Then there is the problem with the work situation: If people with disabilities work in workshops, they receive pocket money – but no salary.
And so-called “special schools” are criticized for separating children and thus preventing exchange and joint learning.
Our vision: We want everyone to be able to move freely and without obstacles in Austria and to manage their everyday lives.
People with disabilities should have the right to mobility, education and work – with a salary that allows them to live on.
This is how we do it.
Wages instead of pocket money:
Those who work should be well paid
and receive full social security benefits.
Don’t write anyone off in the job market:
Up to the age of 25, no person should be considered unfit for work unless they have previously attempted to work for at least two years.
This could reduce the number of people with disabilities classified as unfit for work by around 2,000.
Resources in the AMS:
Although people with disabilities are defined as a target group by the AMS, they do not have their own funds allocated to them.
That is about to change.
Only with means that pursue a goal can people be integrated into the labour market.
Inclusion Fund:
The federal and state governments are to pay into a fund from which personal assistants and central contact points for questions about needs and assistance will be financed.
Improving the position of personal assistants:
Those who accompany people with disabilities in their everyday lives and take on important tasks – from hygiene to leisure activities – must be better protected under employment law and be paid fairly.
Inclusive schools instead of special schools:
Special schools, as they still exist today, should gradually make way for inclusive schools.
We want schools that are there for everyone.
All children, with and without disabilities, should be able to attend school together.
Parents and classmates are actively involved, class sizes are reduced and more staff are made available.
Children with disabilities should be given a more flexible catalogue of learning objectives – with the involvement of their parents.
Regular schools should also work more inclusively and provide the best possible learning conditions for children with disabilities.
How young people live
Young people often cannot afford the rent.
Wages do not rise with rental costs.
This makes it difficult for many young people and especially young families to build their own home.
17.5 percent of 25- to 34-year-olds in Austria still live with their parents, with young men leaving the parental nest later on average: 23.2 percent of young men and 11.8 percent of young women of this age still live at home.
In Austria, sons move out on average at the age of 26 and daughters at the age of 24.4, according to the Eurostat survey.
In Croatia, young people do not move out of the “mama” hotel until they are 32, in Italy they are on average over 30.
A major reason for late moving out in many European countries is simply the fact that young people often cannot afford their own apartment.
Young people often cannot afford the rent.
In addition, youth unemployment is still relatively high in many European countries – a late consequence of the 2008 financial crisis.
In Austria we are doing better on the issue of youth unemployment,
However, rent is still a problem for many young families.
In Innsbruck, a young family already spends 40% of their income on rent.
Our vision: Young people should be able to develop fully here in Austria.
Rents are rising twice as fast as wages.
190 Price increase: 1998 = 100
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
In Austria we are better off.
Social housing has laid the foundation for us – unlike in many other European countries – not having to rely on “Mommy’s” hotel.
All young people and young families in Austria should be able to fulfil their dream of owning their own home.
This is how we do it.
Abolition of the brokerage fee for tenants
A major cost for many young people when buying their first apartment starts with the estate agent’s fee.
In many cases, you have to put aside money for several months' rent at the beginning to pay the estate agent.
We demand that the brokerage fee in future be paid by the landlord, who is usually the client
Interest-free loans for young families to pay the deposit
For the vast majority of rental apartments, a deposit must also be paid at the beginning, usually in the amount of three months' rent.
This already represents a significant financial hurdle for many.
By introducing a housing deposit fund, we want to help people on low incomes to overcome this hurdle more easily and thus make it easier for them to start buying a home.
Following the example of a model from Styria, this fund is intended to provide interest-free loans to young people who would otherwise have no chance of owning their own home due to their low income.
Penalties for excessive rent
We demand the introduction of high fines for landlords who engage in rent gouging and deliberately demand excessive rents and/or utility bills.
The fine could be up to 300 percent of the excess rent/operating costs.
Currently, rent gouging is completely unpunished!
Reintroduction of home support
Students often spend a particularly high proportion of their (often low) income on rent.
In order to support students, we want to reintroduce housing support for students in order to create more affordable housing.
Due to the abolition of housing subsidies, rents in many student residences have risen significantly (by 26% from 2009 to 2015 according to IHS calculations).
Abolition of rental tax and rent price cap
Our program for the abolition of rent tax and clear regulations for rent price caps naturally helps young families in particular.
By abolishing the rental tax, even a young family can save a whole month’s rent per year.
Humanity wins. Also in digitalization.
Digitalization, artificial intelligence (AI), and robotics have the potential to help solve the major challenges of our time: dangerous, monotonous, and strenuous tasks can be taken over by robot systems.
AI is revolutionizing imaging diagnostics through machine evaluations, thereby enabling more accurate diagnostics and more targeted treatments.
But there are also numerous starting points in nursing – keyword nursing assistance systems – or in the care of older people.
Our living and working environments are changing rapidly - the way we communicate, obtain information and shape our interactions is in constant change.
Entire working and professional worlds have been redefined in recent years, some job profiles have disappeared, and new professions have emerged.
Predictions about where we as a society and economy will develop in times of digitalization and artificial intelligence (AI) and what challenges we will have to face have never been more difficult to make than they are today.
Many studies say that digitalization will cost jobs; Some of them see jobs of low-skilled workers as being particularly threatened, others those of the middle class.
Still other scientists believe that job creation and job losses will balance each other out.
It would be irresponsible and dishonest to act as if there are no losers if we do not actively support digitalization.
It is up to us to shape the framework in such a way that the benefits can also be used in the interests of the workers.
Just because something is new doesn’t mean it’s good – and there’s nothing innovative about poor working conditions and low wages.
On the contrary: this is a centuries-old business model that the trade unions and social democrats have always opposed.
This means that we must not give up control of the situation.
We are at a crossroads where we have to decide whether we watch and wait and accept the consequences of this upheaval with a shrug of the shoulders, or whether we actively shape this change and do not simply allow those things that harm our society to happen.
“Humanity wins. We will keep digitalization under human control and make the enormous opportunities it offers available to everyone.”
The comprehensive digitalization of almost all areas of life and work is often referred to as the fourth industrial revolution (after mechanization, electrification, automation).
We must clearly recognize the negative aspects of digitalization.
If we are not careful, digitalization will pollute our society like industrialization pollutes our climate.
However, if we are careful and do not give up control - that is, if we shape and manage digitalization - then it also offers incredible opportunities.
These must be used so that everyone wins.
Humanity wins.
This is how we do it.
Modern working world
In the world of work, digitalization means, on the one hand, that relevant information can increasingly be accessed regardless of location and time.
We can now often work anywhere and at any time – and this does not necessarily lead to a gain in freedom, as workers leave a “data trail” and can therefore be monitored much more intensively.
This raises numerous problems for labour law, which is still based on the idea that employees come to the factory, office or shop at certain times to work there.
In a fully digitalized world, however, there are massive phenomena of boundary blurring with regard to place and time, which do not necessarily have to be positive.
This particularly concerns working from home in the so-called home office, constant accessibility on the smartphone or so-called platform work.
On the one hand, all these phenomena enable more self-determined and flexible working in the interests of employees, but on the other hand, they can also lead to all risks being passed on to the employees and them having to be available to work on call at low wages.
In a modern working world, modern solutions are needed, especially when it comes to the problem of constant availability, platform work, the need for modern working hours, or how to deal with the consequences of upheavals in the labor market and unemployment.
How to deal with artificial intelligence: AI strategy
Not everything that is technically feasible is desirable, right and good.
Numerous legal, ethical and social issues need to be considered.
On the one hand, research and innovation in this area must be massively supported,
on the other hand, social inequalities must neither arise nor be promoted as a result.
Human rights must also not be affected under any circumstances.
The focus must be on a process involving the population, which must begin with a massive information and training programme.
Finland is leading the way – based on an AI strategy adopted in 2017, Finland is not only investing heavily in research and development,
but has launched a broad-based training program for all sections of the population in the belief that only AI-fit citizens will participate in the dialogue about the framework conditions (democratization of AI).
Not all Finns should be able to program and use AI, but everyone should be able to demonstrate the basic skills.
The aim was to provide training to 1% of the population and 5% of companies.
Thanks to the playful approach chosen, the goal was achieved within four months.
It is precisely in the formulation of the framework conditions that profoundly social democratic starting points arise: long-term societal and social consequences must be anticipated and weighed up.
For example, the question of how work – both paid and unpaid – should be divided between humans and machines in the future.
For example, what role do we give to technology in the context of care?
New and higher qualifications are becoming the decisive factor.
We must therefore put all our efforts into training skilled workers and provide the opportunity for retraining through qualification funding and the best and most modern school system.
Cybercrime
Cyberattacks on companies and government institutions are increasing worldwide and pose a real threat to our country's sovereign ability to act and security of supply.
In order to respond optimally to this particular form of threat, clear structures and responsibilities are needed.
For this we need additional specialists for our intelligence services.
We must also restore the trust in the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution that has been completely lost.
Because cybercrime knows no borders, we rely on cooperation with partner services from all countries around the world.
It is necessary to set up and pool forces from the police and the federal army as well as experts from the economy via a nationwide situation centre.
Broadband expansion
Connection to the Internet is of central importance in the modern knowledge society.
Powerful high-speed networks – such as fiber optic and 5G – must therefore be available in all Austrian households.
The aim must be to offer gigabit-capable connections nationwide by 2030.
This can only be achieved by establishing a dense fiber optic network in conjunction with universally available mobile coverage.
The market launch of 5G in the state capitals is scheduled to take place by the end of 2020, i.e. after the frequency ranges 700/1500/2100 MHz have been allocated.
A nationwide offering of 5G and gigabit connections is to be available by the end of 2025, and nationwide coverage with gigabit connections is to be achieved by 2030.
The enormous investment requirements for these projects are to be financed on the one hand by the extensive development of funding models (from the proceeds of frequency allocations) and by corresponding requirements for investments in the context of frequency allocations.
This is especially true for rural areas.
Access to the Internet creates opportunities for new forms of involvement and participation.
The Internet infrastructure must therefore be defined as part of the basic services with a public service mandate, as indispensable as the connection to the telephone or electricity network.
Knowledge increases when you share it.
For a progressive internet policy and fair rules in media policy
The global network can be a place of freedom, open communication, social participation and individual and entrepreneurial self-development.
But it also poses dangers.
The former should continue to develop its potential, but something must be done about the dangers.
The Internet has become an indispensable part of everyday life.
Whether it’s a mobile phone, laptop or PC – we are almost constantly moving in the digital space and are thus helping to shape the comprehensive technological and social change that comes with digitalization.
This change affects all areas of life: how we communicate.
How we work.
How we do business.
How we are creative.
How we shape freedom and democracy.
Of course, there is also the other side: Internet crime, hate on the internet, filter bubbles or cyber bullying are just a few keywords.
We want to seize opportunities and manage risks.
It must be ensured that everyone can benefit from digital progress, resources are distributed fairly and barriers are removed.
The Internet, which was created to connect people and facilitate access to knowledge and information, must not become exclusively an oversized marketplace and place of perfidious manipulation, aggression and comprehensive surveillance.
The media sector is also facing major challenges due to digitalization.
Everything is changing: how and by whom journalistic products are produced, how they are distributed and how they are consumed.
The biggest challenge is to reach a diverse Austrian media landscape.
Austrian media are in direct competition with international online corporations that make enormous profits and have a major competitive advantage over Austrian media companies due to incomplete regulation (levies, tax law, data protection, media law, etc.).
Media usage behavior has also changed significantly; information and entertainment are increasingly consumed in the digital space – whether on a smartphone, computer, laptop or cell phone.
Our vision: Social democracy fights to make the digital world free, equal, fair and based on solidarity.
And we need a playing field where the same rules apply to everyone – regardless of whether they are an international media group or an Austrian newspaper publisher.
This is how we do it.
Against upload filters and for net neutrality
In recent years there have been repeated attempts to censor the neutral and free Internet.
Basic democratic freedoms, such as the prohibition of prior censorship, freedom of speech and assembly, or the protection of the confidentiality of correspondence – which are taken for granted outside the Internet – must also be preserved on the Internet.
As social democrats, we continue to fight against upload filters and for freedom of expression and information.
International digital corporations should not be allowed to decide what is allowed on the Internet and what is not.
We want to preserve the diversity of information on the Internet.
Ensuring net neutrality is also important.
This means that all content must be transmitted by the Internet provider at the same speed and in the same quality.
Nobody should be able to buy a “digital fast lane”.
Strengthening media education in schools
We need an inclusive digital society.
The opportunities of the digitalized world must be open regardless of age, gender, income or financial situation.
Media literacy is more relevant than ever.
It enables people to use new media in a self-determined, creative and socially responsible manner.
We therefore need to strengthen media education in schools.
The teaching of media literacy must be made compulsory and interdisciplinary in the curricula.
Media education must also be given greater consideration in teacher training and continuing education.
Special offers are needed for people with physical or mental disabilities.
We want a mandatory expansion of accessibility in the digital world as well.
Hate on the Internet
The Internet must not be a place for violence and discriminatory, racist or misogynistic hate messages.
Criminal conduct must be easy to report.
This requires an increase in and training of police and judicial personnel.
Platform providers must also be held more accountable.
Developments in the field of artificial intelligence and its misuse pose a threat to democracy and coexistence.
Algorithms are increasingly influencing everyone’s lives and everyday routines.
They make decisions about what users see on social media platforms, influence lending, prices of goods and services, and career opportunities.
Independent and critical opinion formation is at risk from echo chambers, filter bubbles, fake news and social bots.
There is therefore a need for disclosure of the algorithms and more transparency.
For example, it must be indicated whether a post is advertising or not.
This is especially true for influencers.
Data protection
A major challenge of the Internet age is data protection.
We are committed to modern and self-determined data protection.
Everyone must have the right to decide how their data is used.
We reject the storage of personal data without cause, as represented by “data retention”.
It does not make life safer for any of us. Particular sensitivity is also required when it comes to the storage options of platforms (e.g. “Alexa”).
This is a challenge now and in the future, for which we want to develop our own rules.
Modern copyright
Cultural creation needs our support.
Old business models and thus also the income from these areas are collapsing due to digitalization.
Creative people find themselves in financially difficult and existentially threatening situations.
Our job here is to ensure that creatives receive an appropriate share of the revenue from new business models.
This requires modern copyright law and, above all, enforceable copyright contract law that guarantees remuneration for creative work and fair contractual conditions for artists.
Creative people must be more involved in the commercial exploitation of their works.
However, the Internet and digital technologies also enable new creative possibilities.
The separation between producers and consumers of copyrighted content is increasingly disappearing.
This gives rise to new cultural techniques that increasingly include creative aspects.
Memes and remixes of all kinds, for example, are part of the everyday life of the younger generation and are a creative expression of their worlds.
Modern copyright law must be designed in such a way that it does not represent an obstacle to current creative, social and economic developments.
The aim must be to achieve a fair balance between the interests of authors, exploiters and users.
Contemporary media policy
The current system of media funding dates back to the analogue age and is no longer up to date in this form.
Media funding must therefore be adapted to the digital age and designed to be platform-independent.
It does not matter whether it is digital or analogue media, online or on paper.
Media funding should be a promotion of journalistic content.
In addition, support for programmers is intended to facilitate the transition to digital.
Public broadcasting plays a special role as a leading red-white-red medium and source of high-quality information.
In view of the massive challenges, its structures must be adapted to the requirements of a media company in the 21st century.
The ORF needs a flexible and clear organization that best supports journalistic work under the conditions of increased convergence between print, TV, radio and the Internet.
The path to this goal will be determined by an innovative, holistic digitalization strategy.
We want to remove the restrictions on online offerings.
The ORF needs freedom of digital development in order to meet the audience’s modern media usage and to connect with the needs of young people.
Free and equal, fair, solidarity and diversity
Some people, not just opponents of social democracy and of the left in general, claim to have recognized that social democracy is becoming bogged down in issues and is only pursuing minority politics.
That's nonsense, of course.
Nevertheless, the criticism is particularly popular with the right because they believe that it will allow them to both reject the demands of disadvantaged groups discriminated against by laws and the actual constitution and at the same time weaken social democracy.
It’s actually quite simple.
Social democracy has, if we may allow ourselves a biological comparison here, freedom, equality, justice and solidarity in its DNA.
What’s more, this is social democracy.
That is why social democracy will always stand up against injustice and discrimination.
Just as we will always be there for working people.
The SPÖ will always stand up for all people who want a society based on solidarity and freedom, which means always free of discrimination, and will work with them to make life better for everyone.
It is nice that there are more and more people in Austria, even across party lines, who are holding on to this idea.
For example, around 500,000 people supported the women's referendum in 2018 and signed for equality, diversity and respect.
At the same time, we are still not where we should be.
People in Austria continue to face discrimination in their daily lives because of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
If you ask Austrians whether all forms of sexual discrimination should be eliminated, we are in the upper middle range in a European comparison.
Nevertheless, in Austria – especially in private life – there are still not equal rights for everyone, regardless of who you love or how you define yourself.
The risk for an average LGBTIQ person to become a victim of physical assault in Austria is around ten times higher than the average for the population.
This must change!
23%
of LGBTIQ people have been attacked or threatened with violence.
10 times
This is how high the risk is for LGBTIQ people to become victims of physical assault.
2 of 3
LGBTIQ people hide their sexual orientation.
Our vision: A society based on solidarity, fairness, equality and freedom is free from discrimination.
No one should be discriminated against because of who he or she loves – not before the law or in the registry office, not in working life or the housing market, not in education or leisure time.
Only then will we create the basis for true equality and acceptance.
This is how we do it.
Equal rights at all levels – Levelling-Up
Uniform protection against discrimination already applies in the world of work.
There, the law prohibits unequal treatment based on ethnicity, gender, age, sexual orientation or disability.
In other areas of life we ​​are not yet that far along.
It shouldn't matter who you love and kiss when you're looking for an apartment or going out for a drink at a bar.
But at the moment, this is not the case: Anyone who wants to rent an apartment may not be discriminated against on the basis of their gender or skin colour, but if someone is denied a rental contract because of their sexual orientation, this is not prohibited.
Even when entering a bar, you are not protected from being thrown out if you are not welcome there as a same-sex couple.
Protection against discrimination must be expanded to ensure equal treatment not only in the labour market but also in private life when it comes to access to goods (e.g. housing) and services (e.g. going to bars).
In addition, we want to anchor the protected grounds of “sexual orientation” and “gender identity” in the equal treatment paragraph of the Federal Constitution.
All hurdles, for example in access to marriage for all and the third gender registration, should be removed.
In the long term, the aim is to develop a modern and future-proof partnership law.
But there is also a need to expand awareness-raising and service offerings against discrimination in the workplace (e.g. by strengthening and expanding the competencies of the GBA).
Violence has no place in our society
23% of LGBTIQ people in Austria have been physically or sexually attacked or threatened with violence in the last five years.
Violence should have no place in our society.
As is already common practice in most European countries, we want to develop statistics and action plans to combat homophobic and transphobic violence.
We want to provide better support to LGBTIQ asylum seekers both by training officials and by providing them with their own accommodation during the asylum process.
Hatred, exclusion or even violence must have no place in our society – politics and civil society must join forces in the fight against these phenomena!
More respect and protection, no discrimination
As in every area, there are supporters but also opponents.
Our challenge will be to raise awareness.
Educational measures such as awareness campaigns can make a significant contribution to better understanding, raising awareness and ultimately to cohesion in society.
To this end, we want to implement a national action plan against homophobia and transphobia (in accordance with the request of the ECRI Commission of the Council of Europe to Austria).
The diversity of our society must be visible, particularly in the areas of education, health and family policy, and contribute to the positive development of cohesion in Austria!
We want to better protect intersex children from gender reassignment surgery.
We want to ensure that school lessons focus on diversity and adequate sexual education.
We want to guarantee trans* people a self-determined life (especially in the areas of medicine and when changing gender: free choice of first name without pathologisation, ensuring that costs for necessary operations and treatments are covered, setting up and strengthening counselling centres, e.g. for trans* children and their families).
Neutrality obliges us to pursue an active foreign policy
Cooperation and solidarity as well as the will to work for the common good and peace must become the priority of foreign policy.
Mediation instead of escalation, reconciliation instead of aggression, must have priority in international cooperation.
The name Trump today stands for worrying developments in the world: increasing instability, nationalism, and, with it, a selfish foreign policy that increasingly ignores the interests of other regions and states as well as common rules and agreements of the global community of nations.
Neutrality and diplomacy
As a neutral country, Austria has a special task to promote dialogue and multilateralism and to actively promote peace policy.
Disarmament, arms control and the containment of small arms, instead of driving up the export figures of our arms companies, must therefore be the goal of a humanitarian foreign policy.
Of course, military neutrality does not mean being neutral between democracy and dictatorship or between law and barbarism.
There can be no neutrality towards injustice.
Stop child labor
Foreign trade policy must also be geared towards peaceful coexistence.
Trade agreements must focus on the well-being of people – this applies to agreements between the European Union and other countries and regions, but also to Austria’s foreign trade.
The aim must be fair, equitable and sustainable trade, guided by human rights and fundamental social rights.
Therefore, a global set of rules is needed in which protection mechanisms for poorer regions are possible and labor and human rights as well as high environmental standards are binding.
We cannot demand peace while increasing misery through our own trade policies.
152 million children
must work regularly.
That is
1 in 10 children
worldwide.
Almost 2/3 of them
43 hours
during the week.
This is particularly true for development cooperation: Austria and the entire EU must increase financial resources here and focus (even more) on the needs of the recipient countries and their inhabitants.
Our own interests and those of the corporations, which all too often see a business opportunity here, must take a back seat.
We want Austria to become a driving force in achieving the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals by 2030.
Our vision: A world without exploitation of people and nature is possible.
Austria and Europe must align their global political and economic relations with human rights and the preservation of global livelihoods.
Dialogue and humanity are at the heart of our foreign policy.
Austria must return to an active policy of neutrality.
We want a world trade that prevents child labor and slave labor
and environmental standards rather than increasing these crimes.
This is how we do it.
Against child and forced labour
Obligation for companies to check the supply chain of the products they sell as part of a “social responsibility law”.
A European supervisory agency
Creation of a European regulatory agency to decide on product approval in the European market.
Human rights before trade agreements
No approval for trade agreements as long as human rights, social and environmental standards are not binding and cannot be sanctioned in existing agreements.
Coherent development policy
Adequately funded and people-oriented development cooperation, with the aim of using 0.7 percent of gross national income (GNI) for development cooperation in the future.
Neutrality and peace policy
Active neutrality and peace policy and strengthening of the UN headquarters in Vienna.
Humanitarian aid
Increasing the foreign disaster fund and developing a political strategy for humanitarian aid.
Europe, because many things can only be achieved together.
Many of the challenges we face can only be solved together in the European Union.
The European Union can make a significant contribution to making Europe, and thus Austria, more social, ecological and fair.
Instead of corporations, people and nature could be the focus.
But for this to happen, EU policy must change.
And clearly so.
Too often we see decisions being made that put the profits of a few above the needs of the vast majority.
The objectives of European policy must be refocused on quality of life, employment, distributive justice, sustainability, public goods and innovation.
The one-sided austerity policy must be overcome.
Instead, what is needed is public investment and employment initiatives.
We will not take part in the sell-off of European infrastructure or the hawking of water.
Nor will we allow workers to be played off against each other: we stand up for the rights of workers throughout Europe.
In Europe, we lose hundreds of billions of euros in tax revenue every year due to tax fraud and aggressive tax tricks by corporations.
This money could be used to answer crucial questions about the EU’s future, while at the same time providing states with sufficient resources to solve national challenges in the areas of housing, education and care.
We need the EU to collect taxes from corporations.
Tax tricks, profit shifting – we know this from the headlines surrounding the Panama Papers and other scandals – show that the fight for tax justice is now a global problem.
If Starbucks & Co. shift their profits to other countries, Austria alone can do little.
Instead of participating in tax dumping, we rely on cooperation. Multinational corporations benefit from the common European market and must make their fair contribution – also at European level.
Our goal is fair common rules of the game.
We have achieved some successes in recent years, but many problems remain unresolved.
Everyone knows that we must finally take action against the climate catastrophe.
Here, too, the EU is called upon, because only if we pull together in the EU can we prevent this catastrophe.
We see a need for action especially in the transport sector, where CO2 emissions continue to rise.
In addition to improving technological efficiency, the key to successful climate protection is the switch to renewable energy and an end to nuclear energy.
We also know that in a common market, toxic substances do not stop at our borders.
Here we will exert pressure in the European Union and declare war on the massive use of pesticides.
Just as we in Austria oppose individual millionaires trying to buy politics, we will also draw a clear red line here in Europe.
There are over 50,000 lobbyists in Brussels, of which only two percent are working on behalf of workers' concerns.
But democracy cannot be bought.
The European Union must act as a counterweight here, putting people rather than profits at the centre of politics.
This also includes an unequivocal stance from European politicians when it comes to defending our democratic and constitutional principles.
We will not allow the ghosts of the past to catch up with us.
Because state arbitrariness and political authoritarianism have just as little place in Austria as in the rest of Europe.
Our vision: Peace, stability and social justice for all European citizens
This is how we do it.
Fair wages and good working conditions throughout Europe, high minimum standards and priority given to fundamental social rights
End wage and social dumping in Europe:
Control and punishment, no funding and exclusion from public tenders of companies caught engaging in wage and social dumping.
Fair tax policy:
Taxes must be paid where the profits are generated.
There needs to be full transparency in corporate taxes, taxation of financial transactions and real taxation of internet companies at the European level.
EU funding halted due to violation of fundamental rights:
No funding for member states that disregard fundamental human rights, women's rights, democracy and the rule of law principles.
Early warning system for the rule of law in Europe with regular reviews.
Listen to people, not corporations:
Binding and accessible lobby registers for all EU institutions, in particular the European Council, as well as balanced consideration of all sides when filling expert groups in the European Commission.
Green New Deal in Europe:
Europe-wide CO2 tax, investment program in infrastructure, innovation and green jobs as well as binding climate targets for the whole of Europe and a joint exit from the plastic madness by banning microplastics.
Ban on glyphosate and other herbicides whose negative effects on health cannot be ruled out.
Water is a human right:
Protect our water throughout Europe by enshrining the right to clean drinking water for all people, excluding water privatisation from any trade agreement, and protecting groundwater and water bodies.
The Marcel Hirschers of tomorrow
Motivating children and young people to do sports
Let us work together to ensure that our children and young people are active, enjoy exercise and sport in kindergarten and school, and are thus motivated to engage in lifelong physical activity.
Investing in our children and young people means investing in the future!
We must therefore offer all children and young people the opportunity to engage in daily physical activity in order to make it a part of their lifestyle.
The implementation of daily exercise and sports units in all kindergartens and school types is an important contribution to this.
This not only provides the students with fun and livens up their everyday lives.
Sport also supports learning because it has been proven to activate the brain, increase the ability to concentrate and thus enable better school performance.
Active children and young people who are motivated to participate in sports also provide the necessary basis for club and association sports, right up to top-level sport.
Children and young people should also be given the opportunity to exercise more in their free time.
Especially on weekends, public holidays and during school holidays, suitable sports facilities are empty, especially those provided by the public sector.
These free capacities should therefore also be made available to people during school holidays.
The opening of sports facilities should therefore be embedded in an overall strategy for a “daily exercise and sports unit”.
This daily exercise and sport unit and all other expenditure on exercise and sport will more than pay for itself in many ways over the course of the lives of our children and young people.
Among other things, this will significantly reduce healthcare costs. Exercise and health are meaningful and economically important for all other age groups.
Health-related sports activities should therefore be adequately supported by the respective health and social sectors.
And that's how we finance it.
The SPÖ is committed to a structurally balanced state budget.
We stand for intelligent savings – and for sensible investments in our children, in our infrastructure and in climate protection.
We want a fairer distribution of taxes.
It cannot be that in Austria – in international comparison – the entire tax burden rests on working people, while multi-millionaires and large international corporations hardly pay any taxes.
Our program is fully funded. We would like to move around 12 billion euros by the end of the next legislative period. This corresponds to approximately 3% of GDP.
Investments Financing
Investments in social affairs, health, employment and the economy
Security, Justice and Development Cooperation Package
Investing in education and our children
Tax cut for 7 million people and investing companies
1.7
7
4
3.2
4.8
Budget surplus according to WIFO forecast
Reduced spending through savings and growth effects (e.g. tax cuts, investments)
Fair taxes on large international corporations, tax evaders and millionaire taxes in Austria
In billions of euros.
In addition, we envisage a climate protection fund. We want to use this fund to finance measures to protect our climate. These investments are intended to prevent threatened fines amounting to around 6.6 billion euros.
