Election manifesto of the Freedom Party of Austria FPÖ
National Council election 2006
Employees
Work permits for foreigners are only granted for a limited period and may only be issued if there is an acute shortage of workers in the relevant occupational sector that cannot be remedied in the medium term.
Guest workers will lose their residence permit if they are unemployed for long periods of time or repeatedly and therefore endanger the welfare state.
Foreigners who work illegally must be immediately deported to their countries of origin after having all residence and work permits revoked.
A separate social insurance scheme must be created for guest workers, specifically designed for temporary stays in Austria.
There is no need for the public sector to compensate for any shortfall.
Expenses for household services (gardening, cleaning, childcare, repairs, etc.) should be 60% tax deductible as business expenses.
The tax deductibility is capped at a further maximum of 3,000 euros per person.
In order to protect atypical employees, the FPÖ is calling for uniform labor law regulations for all employees who are dependent on an employer.
Non-compete clauses must be abolished for ordinary employees.
Costs for apprentices during their time at vocational school are not borne by the employer but by the public sector.
The FPÖ firmly rejects the abolition of Sunday rest or the extension of weekly working hours while maintaining the same wage or salary.
The FPÖ is calling for an extension of the transition periods to protect the Austrian labour market until the wage levels in the new EU member states have been aligned with those in Austria.
Compulsory membership in the Chamber of Labour should be replaced by voluntary membership.
45 years of work are enough.
The FPÖ rejects a further increase in the retirement age because the labor market is not prepared for it.
Training instead of immigration:
Due to the shortage of domestic nursing staff, a training and retraining initiative must be launched.
Employment permits for foreign nursing staff are to be issued for a limited period only until the demand can be covered by Austrian nursing staff.
Family
Consideration of family size in wage and income tax through the introduction of family splitting based on the French model.
Divorced couples who fulfill their duties as parents should also be granted tax relief.
Deductibility of household-related services and private childcare as business expenses following the Finnish model.
Full implementation of the FPÖ model "childcare voucher" by abolishing the additional income limit
and adjusting the duration of the leave of absence under employment law to the three-year period for receiving child care allowance.
In the medium term, child care allowance is to be extended until the youngest child starts school, with a partial amount being paid out for a specific purpose in the form of a kindergarten voucher.
Parents must have freedom of choice when selecting a childcare facility.
The rigid district division must be abolished.
Restriction of child care allowance to Austrian citizens.
This requires a change in European law.
All family benefits are to be increased through an annual index adjustment.
If no maintenance payments are made for a child or if the payments are too low, the state must ensure maintenance in the amount of the age-related basic needs of the minor child.
Public childcare facilities must guarantee high-quality pedagogical care.
They should not be "storage places" under any circumstances.
The opening of kindergartens and day-care centres during school holidays must be ensured as needed.
Housing subsidies must be made more family-friendly and take family planning into account by removing restrictions on living space.
Women
Doubling the assessment of child-rearing periods in pension insurance.
Women should be entitled to a basic pension depending on the number of children they have, which must be expanded to include a mother's pension.
100% reimbursement of costs for artificial insemination.
We demand targeted career preparation courses for women returning to work
and support programs for retraining and new training.
The social skills that women acquire through parenting are indispensable.
Equal pay for equal work must no longer remain an empty formula.
Collective agreements must be regulated in such a way that this demand is also reflected in women's pay slips.
In many industries, preparation and post-processing times are requested but not paid.
These times must be compensated.
Creation of a voluntary community service model also for women in order to meet the increasing demand in care facilities.
Women who volunteer to work in the care sector as part of their community service should be given the opportunity to obtain a permanent position in public care facilities
and should therefore be given privileged treatment when applying for a job based on their experience.
If the graduates decide to pursue further social or medical training,
An exemption from tuition fees for the period of the minimum study duration could serve as an incentive.
Foreigner
Immigration stop.
The fact that Austria is not a country of immigration must be enshrined in the Federal Constitution.
A separate State Secretariat must be set up to deal with the repatriation of foreigners.
An administrative offence of "refusal to adapt" must be created.
A foreign police force based on the Swiss model must be set up to deal exclusively with the concerns of foreigners, including the multifaceted crime committed by foreigners.
This unit has special competencies, language skills and is networked with other departments.
A general visa requirement for non-EU foreigners must be introduced.
Excluded from this are Switzerland
and Norway.
The special rights of Turkish citizens must be abolished immediately.
During the first three years of residence, non-EU citizens are not entitled to social assistance or emergency aid.
Social abuse should be included as a criminal offence in the criminal code and punishable by deportation.
The official language in Austria is German (Article 8 B-VG), so all translations of documents required by authorities
and interpreters to be financed by the foreigner.
The granting of citizenship must be reviewed retrospectively;
a citizenship obtained by fraud is revoked,
It can also be withdrawn if there is insufficient willingness to adapt (knowledge of the country and language).
Naturalized criminals must be stripped of their Austrian citizenship.
Political agitation is in any case tied to citizenship; the offender loses his or her residence permit.
In public schools, state participation in the selection of religious teachers must be ensured in order to prevent misuse of religious education by radical Islamists.
Fifteen years of permanent and legal residence in Austria, as well as sufficient knowledge of the German language and local culture are essential requirements for the granting of citizenship.
There is no legal entitlement to be granted Austrian citizenship.
There is no legal right to family reunification.
Foreigners who have committed criminal offences must be deported immediately.
Violent foreigners must serve their prison sentences abroad and are also banned from entering the country.
The asylum system must not be transferred to asylum corporations, but must be implemented by the federal government.
The burden of proof in asylum procedures lies with the applicant.
Unclear cases are to be taken into custody pending deportation.
False statements must be punished immediately with deportation.
Those without ID (sans papiers) and illegal immigrants must be returned to the country from which they crossed the border.
Biometric identification measures for asylum seekers must be introduced across the EU
and the associated infrastructure are optimized.
Asylum seekers are to be housed in separate, remote facilities, where they are to be kept until their asylum procedure has been legally concluded and are to be provided with the bare necessities.
Asylum seekers are not assigned a job.
Asylum seekers who commit criminal offenses are deported immediately and without the possibility of appeal.
The reason for asylum of “traumatization” is abolished.
Asylum applications from safe third countries must be rejected.
According to the Geneva Refugee Convention (GCR), refugees from regions that have recognized the GCR must be returned immediately!
Refugee conventions of the continents (e.g. OAU Convention for Africa) enable a refugee to apply for asylum in geographically and culturally close states.
Applications from such countries must therefore always be rejected.
The provision of development aid must be made dependent on cooperation between states in the area of ​​asylum.
Readmission agreements must be concluded with all countries of origin of asylum seekers.
Security
DNA treatment of ALL criminals.
There must be no further closures of police stations.
Police staffing levels need to be increased.
Bureaucratic central offices must be reduced in size.
Ensuring "area strips".
Expansion of video surveillance in public places.
Increasing minimum sentences for drug trafficking and drug possession.
No tolerance for the "open drug scene".
Ongoing and strict monitoring of low-threshold drug treatment facilities.
Compulsory social work in cases of illegal drug possession
and therapeutic detention of adolescents.
A prison sentence must remain a punishment and must not be degraded to a social break with the character of a holiday.
The European arrest warrant is rejected by the FPÖ.
The state must create attractive conditions for voluntary work in emergency services through tax incentives.
Conscripts who, before enlisting, are already working in a blue light organisation and have received basic training in this organisation, should receive further training in this area during their military service.
As for conscripts
People who work for emergency services should also be granted discounts on public transport or on entry to sports, educational or cultural facilities.
Compulsory military service in the Austrian Armed Forces must be maintained.
Voluntary service in the militia must be made more attractive through incentives.
The ongoing reorganization of the Federal Army must be stopped before more damage is done.
The Federal Army is to be divided into 4 mobile brigades and 10 Landwehr regiments with the aim of achieving a mobilization strength of 70,000 men.
The budget share allocated to financing the tasks of the Federal Army is to be set at 0.8% of GDP.
In addition, a renewal of the vehicle fleet
and an investment focus should be on the purchase of equipment for disaster relief.
The FPÖ demands disclosure of all agreements that are not militarily relevant in connection with the Eurofighter contract.
It must be examined whether the procurement process can be reversed in favour of a more cost-effective solution.
Homeland security and national defense are more important than the army's foreign missions.
Foreign missions under the command of a military alliance are fundamentally rejected.
Foreign missions of Austrian soldiers must not be compulsory
and are intended only for disaster relief operations
and subject to the consent of the parties to the dispute for the purpose of maintaining peace.
Water
No liberalization of water supply!
Our drinking water must not be sacrificed to efforts within the EU towards liberalisation.
The common good depends heavily on a functioning water supply.
A safe drinking water supply is a basic requirement for public health.
Therefore, the drinking water supply must be subject to strict public control and remain “local”.
Water supply, as an essential task of public services, is therefore one of the typical tasks of the public sector.
The FPÖ therefore clearly rejects liberalisation efforts in the area of ​​water supply.
Decision-making rights for water services in public hands!
Cooperation with private companies can be economically interesting and expedient when providing water services, including water supply.
A general framework should be that the ultimate decision-making and disposal rights, including ownership rights to the water supply infrastructure, remain in municipal hands.
However, the changes must be designed in such a way that newly created structures continue to be suitable for sustainably securing our high quality standards.
In order to assess the success of structural changes, clear, comprehensible success criteria must be defined.
The focus of considerations must be on the protection and availability of resources, as well as security of supply in qualitative and quantitative terms.
Sustainable water use through domestic energy industry
Electricity is something we all take for granted.
Over two thirds of Austrian electricity generation comes from the use of the renewable energy source hydropower.
This puts Austria in second place in Europe after Norway.
Hydropower is – alongside biomass utilization – the most important renewable energy source in the Republic.
Hydropower therefore has an energy policy
and economic importance like no other country in the EU.
Our country’s supply of hydropower must not fall into the hands of large corporations, but must be ensured by local, regional companies.
Ensuring a high quality water supply!
The supply of clean water is a basic need of our society.
Especially in rural areas, there is a particular challenge to ensure comprehensive coverage.
Ensuring impeccable water quality is crucial for water suppliers.
The sustainable use of the valuable resource of drinking water is a central concern.
Protect surface and underground water from contamination!
The focus of water protection policy is not on subsequent remediation, but on acting according to the precautionary principle.
Much has been achieved here in recent decades.
Future generations should also have the opportunity to access sufficient water resources of excellent quality.
This objective is anchored in the requirement of the Water Rights Act to maintain groundwater at drinking water quality across the board.
Prevention and protection, more money for flood prevention instead of repairs!
With the federal-state package of spring 2006, federal resources for the disaster fund were increased by €37 million annually.
In the area of ​​Federal Water Management Administration, around €77 million in federal funds will now be available annually over the next 10 years.
However, this obscures the fact that between 1990 and 2005 the actual available federal funds were not increased.
The necessary projects cannot be realized with the funds now promised.
A further increase in federal funds for flood protection is therefore necessary.
Flood prevention is always cheaper than damage control and prevents human suffering.
More space for rivers and streams!
This is the most reliable, cheapest and most ecological flood protection available.
Wherever possible, the water management secures adjacent water areas.
This will preserve natural buffer areas in the event of flooding,
provide valuable habitats for animals and plants
and save the taxpayer expensive technical protection systems.
Preference for natural retention areas over technical development.
Or in ecological terms: river habitat before drainage canal.
This also means that spatial planning is the best tool for sustainable flood protection.
Business
The tax burden on labour in Austria is 4% above the EU average and must be reduced to this level.
The tax useful life of fast-moving assets must be adjusted to the actual useful life in the company.
The declining balance depreciation model must be introduced.
The aim is to achieve a depreciation rate of 30% in the first year.
Profits not withdrawn should be given greater benefit.
The limit should be raised from 100,000 to 300,000 euros.
In addition to sole proprietors and partnerships that prepare financial statements, as well as agricultural and forestry businesses, freelancers and other recipients of income from self-employment, including the income-expenditure calculator, are to be included in the model.
The tax exemption for gratuitous business transfers is to be increased from EUR 365,000 to EUR 700,000.
In principle, no inheritance or gift tax is payable when a business is transferred within the family.
The investment allowance should be reintroduced.
In the event of a loss situation, the possibility of claiming a correlating investment premium must also be created.
The minimum corporate tax must be abolished.
Voluntary unemployment insurance must be created for the self-employed within the framework of public insurance institutions.
Compulsory membership of the Chamber of Commerce, including the chamber levy, must be abolished.
For small and medium-sized enterprises, all possibilities for administrative simplification
and a reduction in bureaucratic burdens from the legislature.
Humanization of the tax system.
The wage cost factor must be taken more into account in taxation in relation to the net production value of a company.
The corporate tax must therefore be adjusted to the human resources costs of a company.
The costs for the apprentice during the vocational school period are not to be paid by the employer but by the public sector.
State, budget, taxes
Any efforts to forcibly liberalise or privatise basic public services through EU legislation must be prevented by Austrian politicians by applying the right of veto.
The current model of individual taxation is to be replaced by family tax splitting.
For families, inheritance and gift taxes in tax classes I and II are to be abolished up to a luxury limit of 500,000 euros.
In the context of gratuitous business transfers, the tax exemption amount is to be increased to EUR 700,000.
If the business is transferred within the family, no inheritance or gift tax is payable.
The bracket creep is a creeping and significant burden on all income taxpayers.
Therefore, the average tax rate levels must be adjusted annually for inflation when determining the income assessment basis.
Humanization of the tax system for the economy in the form of a wage component.
(more human capital - less taxes).
Halving the VAT on energy.
No selling off of our water.
A merger of OMV and Verbund means giving up state control over our water.
The merger of social insurance institutions must continue.
Compulsory membership in chambers must be replaced by voluntary membership.
Seniors
45 years of work are enough.
The FPÖ rejects a further increase in the retirement age because the labor market is not prepared for it.
Pension increases must be made in fixed amounts and not as a percentage.
All public pension systems must be fully harmonised.
Austrian women who have raised children should be entitled to a basic pension depending on the number of children.
The care allowance is to be increased as part of an annual index adjustment.
Creation of a voluntary community service model also for women in order to meet the increasing demand in care facilities.
Women who volunteer to work in the care sector as part of their community service should be given the opportunity to obtain a permanent position in public care facilities
and should therefore be given privileged treatment when applying for a job based on their experience.
If the graduates decide to pursue further social or medical training,
An exemption from tuition fees for the period of the minimum study duration could serve as an incentive.
Education
Children must have sufficient command of the German language to be admitted to regular classes.
This can be ensured by standardized tests with appropriate lead time before school enrollment.
In public compulsory schools, the proportion of foreign children whose mother tongue is not German may not exceed 30 percent (autochthonous ethnic groups are excluded).
If this is not possible in urban areas for organizational reasons, separate classes for foreigners must be set up.
The principle of authority must be restored in educational institutions:
No tolerance for drugs, alcohol and violence.
In school, as in all public institutions, any special clothing norms are prohibited.
Violent young people must be housed in separate institutions and educated there.
Special requests regarding school education, as have recently been repeatedly expressed by foreigners, must be financed by the parents through private schools.
Joint religious instruction, as is already practiced in various countries as a contribution to the dictatorship of tolerance, is also to be rejected
like an ethics class, since no generally accepted values ​​are taught here.
In public schools, state participation in the selection of religious teachers must be ensured in order to prevent misuse of religious education by radical Islamists.
The differentiated school system from the 5th grade onwards must be maintained.
The FPÖ rejects the comprehensive school model.
The polytechnic schools must be transformed into a real career discovery year.
The costs for the apprentice during the vocational school period are not to be paid by the employer but by the public sector.
Intermediate school leaving certificate as an opportunity.
This can be done in the form of adding a two-year secondary school to the secondary school, which is closely interwoven with practical work experience, and after completion of which the initial qualification for a shortened apprenticeship in the apprenticeship occupations covered is available.
In the area of ​​research and development, educational spending must be increased.
The creation of a steadily expanding system of research benefits in the corporate tax area is a step in the right direction.
However, special support for young people in this area has been neglected so far, which is why the FPÖ is demanding an increase in state spending on universities and technical colleges.
There can be no legal right for foreigners to a place at university in Austria.
Health, Care
The right to medically necessary services for all Austrians, regardless of age, gender or financial ability, must be guaranteed in the constitution.
The care allowance is to be increased as part of an annual index adjustment.
No abortion with medical certificate.
The aim of government health policy is to protect life.
Privileges such as those enjoyed by chief physicians in health insurance companies must be abolished.
Private insurance requirement for foreigners
and exclusion from general social insurance.
Creation of a voluntary civil service model also for women.
Women who volunteer to work in the care sector as part of their community service should be given the opportunity to obtain a permanent position in public care facilities
and should therefore be given privileged treatment when applying for a job based on their experience.
If the graduates decide to pursue further social or medical training,
An exemption from tuition fees for the period of the minimum study duration could serve as an incentive.
Training instead of immigration:
Due to the shortage of domestic nursing staff, a training and retraining initiative must be launched.
Employment permits for foreign nursing staff are to be issued for a limited period only until the demand can be covered by Austrian nursing staff.
Health insurance benefits also for natural remedies
and naturopathy.
The cultivation of genetically modified seeds
and its production must be banned in the European Union.
The import of genetically modified seeds
and the import of genetically modified foods into member states of the European Union must be banned.
Energy-autonomous Austria
Immediate withdrawal from the Euratom Treaty:
The money is to be used specifically for the expansion of renewable energy in Austria.
Repeal of the anti-green electricity law.
Energy advice via free consultation check.
Renovation offensive for the domestic housing stock to low-energy standards as part of improved housing subsidies.
Cars that consume less than 5 liters should be given massive tax relief.
Commuters should be able to choose between a commuter allowance and an ÖBB annual ticket.
For power plants in the field of renewable energy, implementation of citizen participation models instead of selling off domestic resources to foreign countries.
Foreign and European policy
The FPÖ categorically rejects Turkey’s EU membership.
Relations with Turkey should be based on mutual respect and may well take the form of a privileged partnership with the EU.
The FPÖ demands the maintenance of Austria’s sovereignty in a Europe of fatherlands
while maintaining perpetual neutrality.
This neutrality is gaining importance at a time when US hegemony is aggressively sweeping the world.
As citizens of a neutral country, Austrian soldiers may not be misused for imperialist purposes.
The FPÖ calls for a core Europe of net payers.
The core Europe of net payers should be linked to increased political influence of the net payers, for example through appropriate voting weighting in the Council.
True to the motto "He who pays, creates wealth".
The FPÖ calls for an immediate stop to immigration for all European Union states
also in the area of ​​so-called family reunification.
The FPÖ is calling for an extension of the transition periods to protect the Austrian labour market until the wage levels in the new EU member states have been aligned with those in Austria.
German minorities in neighboring countries must have the same rights that the Republic of Austria grants to its autochthonous minorities.
The FPÖ strongly opposes the aggressive immigration of Islam in Europe and all manifestations of Islamism.
Development aid must be linked to the willingness of African states to take back their African citizens who attempt to immigrate to Europe illegally or who have been convicted of criminal offences in Europe or who have not been granted asylum status.
Austria’s net contributions to the EU must be reduced.
Only if net contributors reduce their contributions will the EU be forced to reduce the regulatory frenzy
and to carry out a concomitant reduction of the Union-European administrative level.
agriculture
Creation of a basic funding amount for every agricultural holding, regardless of its size.
Prohibition of the use of genetically modified organisms in agriculture and forestry.
Renationalisation of EU agricultural policy.
Implementation of a farmer's biomass offensive according to the motto "Energy production instead of business closure."
The FPÖ is committed to a reasonable coexistence between conventional and organic farming in the sense of entrepreneurial freedom to be able to choose the respective form of production.
Here too, the fight against the use of genetically modified organisms takes priority.
The diversity and confusion regarding quality and certification marks must be addressed by clear, binding food labelling that is easy for consumers to understand.
Animal welfare
Consideration of animal protection as a state objective in the Federal Constitution.
Creation of strict minimum animal welfare standards in the EU
Stop animal transit.
Tightening of the animal testing law
and extending the jurisdiction of the animal welfare ombudsmen to include animal testing.
Away from factory farming and towards natural, respectful treatment of our farm animals.
This can best be achieved on small farms and must be the goal of a new agricultural support policy that focuses on basic support regardless of farm size.
All animal products must be labelled according to their place of origin and type of animal husbandry.
Animal protection must be explicitly included in the curriculum in compulsory schools.
Prohibition of slaughtering animals without prior stunning.
culture
Stop wasting money through “state artists”.
The state must concentrate on creating the framework for artistic creation.
This particularly concerns the construction and provision of the necessary infrastructure.
Art funding must not favor individual artists.
It must be seen primarily as a starting point for talent.
Anyone who practices their "art" merely as a provocation is not entitled to subsidies.
Cultural politicians must have the courage to consciously promote quality and not hide behind jury decisions.
Private art sponsorship should be made attractive through tax incentives.
This is an important step towards depoliticizing artistic creation in Austria.
Drivers
Halving the VAT on energy.
Use of the official price regulation for fuels.
Raising the mileage allowance to 50 cents
Increase in commuter allowances by 15 percent
(Possibility of exchanging for ÖBB annual ticket).
Abolition of the standard consumption tax without replacement
and earmarking of the mineral oil tax for road construction and maintenance.
Abolition of speed limits on motorways following the example of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Making the rigid “driving with lights” regulation more flexible.
It causes higher fuel consumption,
more costs
and additional CO2 emissions.
Introduction of interchangeable license plates for cars/motorcycles.
Nationwide safety program for motorcyclists (no slippery bitumen, crash barriers only with rubber curtains, non-slip floor markings, etc.)
No road pricing for cars,
no city toll.
