Institutional
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Over the past forty years, Belgium has undergone five institutional reforms which have gradually transformed the unitary state it was in 1970 into a federal state made up of Communities and Regions.
Since the 2007 federal elections, the Belgian political situation has become very tense.
It reveals, on both sides of the linguistic border and within each component, divergent interpretations of the place and respective competences of the federal State and the federated entities, and even of our common destiny.
It highlights a progressive blockage of community dialogue.
It marks a tendency on the part of certain Dutch-speaking representatives to ignore the institutional and legal mechanisms for protecting the French-speaking minority – whether it is the increase in harassment on the outskirts of Brussels or the unilateral vote on the proposal to split the Brussels-Hal-Vilvoorde district.
Finally, it expresses the failure of the institutional plumbing process which did not allow an agreement to be reached on the contours of the State or on the district of Brussels-Hal-Vilvoorde.
The legislature has thus highlighted the failure of the supporters of confrontation.
The political instability, the fall of the Government and the institutional chaos in which it took shape have also shown the need to open a broad debate on the future of our institutions.
In this context, openness and dialogue constitute the conditions for appeasement and the path to solutions.
Because strength today is no longer withdrawal and intransigence, it is the ability to avoid confrontation and to promote the search for solutions, beyond worn-out divisions.
Ecolo has always refused any form of community aggression.
Our daily work with Groen!1 is an indisputable illustration of this: what unites us is much stronger than what differentiates us and it is naturally only by working together that the Belgians will give meaning and a future to their federal state.
Even in institutional issues, environmentalists reject controversy and insult, simplification and aggressiveness, by trying, whenever possible and where appropriate from different starting points, to find lasting solutions together.
In line with its constant line of conduct, Ecolo clearly reaffirms its availability to build a new institutional balance, within the framework of an open and modern societal project, in order to emerge sustainably from community conflicts and to be able to give priority to economic, social and environmental emergencies.
Ecolo thus intends to promote a thorough modernisation of the federal system, which brings added value for the citizen and which is based on respect for others and permanent dialogue between the federal State, the Communities and the Regions,
on respect for the rights of individuals, taking into account in particular international law,
and on the intangible principles of interregional and interpersonal solidarity and responsibility.
Beyond that, environmentalists believe that the institutional debate requires a more in-depth dialogue between citizens and institutions.
Thus, Ecolo intends that community dialogue can involve citizens more and participate in informing them.
1 Through a common political group within the Federal Parliament but also membership in the same European Green Party.
Ecolo's proposals
Reinventing the Belgian federal system and community dialogue
Organize the election of a part of the House from a federal constituency
Federal political representatives are only accountable, at best, to their own linguistic group.
This particularity of our federal system creates a democratic deficit, since the action of the representatives of one linguistic group will never be controlled by citizens belonging to another linguistic group.
It also prevents the formation of an organised Belgian political opinion, and in doing so reinforces the centrifugal movement that our political system is experiencing.
In order to create a space for federal political debate and to make some of the federal elected representatives accountable to the whole country, from Arlon to Ostend via Brussels, Ecolo proposes to organise the election of part of the House of Representatives on a federal basis, within a constituency on a Belgian scale.
In 2006, Ecolo thus submitted a proposal to revise the Constitution aimed at organising the election of 50 deputies by all the country's voters, within a federal constituency which would cover the whole country and would overlap the current territorial constituencies.
Each voter would have two ballots, as is the case today with House and Senate elections.
The House would then increase from 150 to 200 members.
This development would nevertheless be offset by the elimination of the 40 directly elected senators, the 10 co-opted senators and the ex officio senators, as part of the Senate reform.
Transforming the Senate into an assembly of Communities and Regions
Ecolo also proposes to transform the Senate into a joint federal assembly composed exclusively of senators from the Community and/or Regions, elected at the second level by the assemblies of the federated entities.
This assembly would then be conceived as a meeting place between Communities and Regions.
In this context, the Senate will be entrusted with the assent to be given to mixed treaties and multilateral cooperation agreements, with special majority and right of evocation of each federated entity.
This proposal also contributes to the simplification and readability of our institutions.
He will also be responsible for initiative and control in respect of the rights and interests of the federated entities.
Restore the simultaneity of federal elections and community/regional elections
The decoupling of federal elections from community/regional elections was intended to contribute to the emergence of a political space specific to the federated entities.
and to enable the appropriation of these new institutions by the population.
However, it must be noted that this objective has not been achieved.
When almost all members of community or regional governments participate in federal elections in eligible positions or when a vast carousel of ministerial responsibilities is organized at all levels of power after each electoral deadline, democratic clarity suffers and the coexistence of distinct democratic spaces becomes illusory.
Furthermore, this decoupling results in a permanent electoral campaign, significantly alters the ability of governments to integrate the long term into their decisions, and fuels the centrifugal logic mentioned elsewhere.
Ecolo therefore proposes to re-establish the simultaneity of federal and community/regional elections, while maintaining the possibility at the federal level of an early dissolution in the event of a major crisis and of a renewal for the remaining duration of the legislature.
Optimize the distribution of skills between entities
Several important policies can be characterised by a certain dispersion of responsibilities and it is important to be able to achieve the greatest possible coherence in the distribution of skills between the different entities which make up the Belgian State.
Ecolo will thus support reforms aimed at improving the federal system or efficiency in the exercise of missions.
Conversely, Ecolo does not intend to support transfers of skills that could endanger Belgium and the unity of the country.
In this respect, Ecolo strongly opposes any attempt that would lead to the weakening or dismantling of the federal character of the State and of interregional and interpersonal solidarity.
Improving the organization and transparency of the Consultation Committee
The Consultative Committee constitutes the meeting place of the Federal Government and the Governments of the federated entities.
In recent years, this body has seen its role – initially focused on the prevention and resolution of conflicts of interest – gradually increase, without its initial organisation being adapted to this development.
Thus, the Consultative Committee has become de facto, in a certain number of cases, a steering or even decision-making body, without any control or transparency of its deliberations being ensured.
Ecolo proposes to review the functioning of the Consultation Committee, in order to further structure its work and organize its democratic control.
It is particularly important to formalise its working procedures and to establish a system making possible the prior deliberation of each government based on an agenda and proposals for deliberation.
Ecolo also intends to ensure the transparency of its decisions with regard to the federal Parliament and the Parliaments of the federated entities, for example through a Senate of the federated entities.
Finally, it is appropriate to coordinate the interministerial conferences with the Consultation Committee, which must ensure their coordination.
Conclude a cultural cooperation agreement
In accordance with the case law of the Constitutional Court, Ecolo is in favour of the conclusion of a framework cooperation agreement on cultural matters between the Communities of our country.
This agreement would allow in particular:
o− to confirm that each Community can participate in activities organized by the other Community and have access to its infrastructure and training resources, subject to agreement on the conditions of participation or on the financial flows linked thereto;
o− to establish that each Community may organise and coordinate in its establishments, French courses and Dutch courses – and German courses – intended for persons belonging to the other Community;
o− to extend cooperation to exchanges of pupils, students, second language teachers, civil servants or to periods of integrated work in the other Community;
o− to organize, within the framework of community skills, spaces for debate common to the different Communities: bilingual forums/television broadcasts, .
o− to organize bilingual education in the territory of the Brussels Region.
Respect all citizens in Brussels, the periphery and beyond
Respect the protections of the Dutch-speaking minority and the multicultural realities of the Region
Ecolo designs the Brussels-Capital Region based on a political project based on cultural and linguistic diversity.
Ecolo therefore wishes to confirm its commitment to respecting the rights of minorities,
and in particular to the protection measures for the Flemish minority in the Brussels-Capital Region.
These arrangements correspond both to the bilingual institutional character of the Region and to the overall balance of the federal architecture.
Ecolo nevertheless believes that it is appropriate to re-establish, with the partial modification of the method of appointing members of the Government and the relaxation of the rule of the double majority in the Regional Parliament and the Joint Assembly, effective measures to protect the democratic institutions of Brussels against their possible blockage by liberticidal parties.
Ratify the Framework Convention for the Protection of Minorities
Ecolo supports the ratification of the Framework Convention for the Protection of Minorities by the federal State and by the federated entities, following its signature on 31 July 2001 on behalf of the Kingdom of Belgium and in application of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.
This involves recognising and protecting all minorities identified as such at federal, community and regional level, without reservation incompatible with the content of the Framework Convention.
In this regard, Ecolo demands that the judicial and electoral rights of the French-speaking minority on the outskirts be respected, as well as the system of facilities granted to municipalities with special status.
Ecolo also points out that the Constitutional Court stated, in its ruling of 3 October 1996, that it was up to each Community to ensure the protection of minorities, guaranteed by Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Ecolo therefore intends that each Community take measures to protect minorities established in its territorial jurisdiction.
Ecolo is also in favour of referring administrative disputes to the general assembly of the Council of State in the event that the applicants reside in a municipality with special status.
Consolidate Wallonia and Brussels.
Building a Wallonia-Brussels Federation
Creating a new political dynamic in Wallonia
The maintenance or development, in Wallonia, of sub-regionalisms or sub-localisms tends to result in numerous dispersions and dilutions of power, in waste of energy and resources, as well as in neutralizations and "duplications" which are particularly costly for the community.
This phenomenon also leads to the empowerment of microspheres of power, which makes democratic control more difficult.
Alongside other priority proposals such as establishing an incompatibility between the functions of parliamentarian and local executive representative,
Ecolo intends to accelerate the emergence of a regional vision on the scale of Wallonia, by creating a Walloon constituency and planning the end of the provinces in their current form.
Ecolo is thus in favour of the creation of an electoral constituency covering the entire regional territory and on the basis of which part of the Walloon Parliament would be elected, in compliance with proportional representation.
Ecolo proposes to restructure and simplify the intermediate level of power, i.e. all the institutions located between the Region and the municipalities, via:
a general reorganization of the intermediate level around communities of communes recognized by decree as a privileged tool for cooperation and management of supra-communal interests, within the framework of a complete network of the territory;
the abolition of the provinces, alongside the establishment of these communities of communes and the transfer of resources and missions to other levels of power.
This reorganization must be carried out with respect for employment, while maintaining the public interest missions carried out and improving the services provided to citizens.
Its general lines are detailed in the Walloon Regional Policy Declaration and it is now appropriate to implement them.
Organize fair and adequate financing of the Brussels-Capital Region
The Brussels-Capital Region is currently experiencing underfunding linked to three institutional factors:
its status as a capital region of the federal state and the communities, its status as an agglomeration region deprived of its hinterland and its status as a European capital.
Without denying the positive contributions that its role as capital brings, these factors also imply additional costs and loss of revenue for Brussels.
At the same time, despite significant progress in sustainable governance, Brussels must face an extremely worrying socio-economic situation2.
Ecolo believes that it is important to provide the Brussels-Capital Region with the resources required to meet its responsibilities.
In this context, Ecolo favours structural avenues which directly link the federal government and the Brussels-Capital Region without penalising the other federated entities, through a modification of the special financing law.
Among the options being considered, Ecolo is particularly favouring a direct financial allocation from the federal level, an increase in the Beliris envelope and its transfer to the Region and 100% compensation for the mortmain.
Furthermore, the funding of community commissions will have to be revised upwards.
Recognizing the Brussels regional fact
Ecolo intends that the complexity of the Brussels regional fact be recognised, namely the constitution of its own political entity, multicultural and bilingual, on the territory of a Region which is also the capital of the federal State and the seat of the European institutions.
Ecolo therefore requests that constitutive autonomy be granted to the Brussels-Capital Region, on the understanding that it will be exercised with a two-thirds majority and a majority within each linguistic group.
Finally, Ecolo demands that linguistic legislation at regional and local level be adapted to the needs of citizens.
Extension of the territorial competence of the Brussels-Capital Region
In the event that a broad institutional discussion were to be opened, going beyond the implementation of certain adjustments within the current institutional balance or the modernisation of the Belgian federal system, the enlargement of the current borders of the Brussels-Capital Region should also be included in the agenda.
In any event, it is also appropriate to consider the central dimension of the Brussels-Capital Region and its socio-economic hinterland, and the transregional character of a certain number of policies.
With this in mind, Ecolo therefore intends to strengthen cooperation between the Brussels-Capital Region and the two other Regions, encourage discussions and cooperation agreements whenever necessary and work on the concept of an Urban Community.
Deepening the common project and solidarity between Wallonia and Brussels
Ecolo reaffirms its attachment to Walloon and Brussels Regions having constitutive autonomy, adequately financed and strong in their linguistic and cultural diversity.
At the same time, Ecolo affirms its attachment to the community of destiny and solidarity between Wallonia and Brussels.
To this end, Ecolo intends to continue and expand the construction of a common democratic project based on the policies developed within the two Regions and on the current skills of the French Community.
In this perspective, Ecolo supports the development of an open society project
, free from any nationalism, refusing any regional withdrawal, building bridges (in particular with the Flemish Community and with the German-speaking Community), respectful of its multiple diversities (Wallonia, Brussels, towns and countryside, cultural pluralities, linguistic minorities, etc.).
This ambition goes beyond the coexistence of two Regions as much as their grouping.
and aims to involve, while respecting the existence and skills of the two Regions, the inhabitants of Wallonia and Brussels in the implementation of a development project, within the Belgian federal balance (hypothesis promoted by Ecolo) or outside if necessary (another hypothesis).
The strengthening of French-speaking institutions around a Wallonia-Brussels Federation – which is not limited to an exclusively French-speaking area but also builds bridges with the Flemish minority in Brussels and the German-speaking minority – contributes to strengthening the effectiveness and readability of policies in the current framework while prefiguring the possibility of having to provide an alternative option to the current federal model.
Ecolo therefore believes that the institutions supporting this project of solidarity between Wallonia and Brussels must be revisited in order to improve the overall effectiveness of the policies implemented to serve citizens.
This is in any case the ambition of the Governments installed last July.
Ecolo thus intends to continue the decompartmentalization of community and regional policies and optimize existing structures in order to better coordinate the work of these two components.
It is with the same aim in mind that Ecolo envisages that adjustments could be made in the exercise of certain skills, towards the Federation on the one hand, and towards the Regions on the other.
Ecolo also promotes the implementation of legislative techniques common to the two Regions and to the French Community.
Finally, it is understood that this development does not in any way prejudice the current powers of the German-speaking Community.
Carrying out a project for the German-speaking Community within the federal system
Organize guaranteed representation in the House and Senate
Ecolo is in favour of organising a system which, as part of a global reform, would ensure a minimum representation of the German-speaking population in the House of Representatives whilst maintaining the representation of the German-speaking Community in the Senate.
Granting constitutive autonomy
Ecolo considers that it is legitimate to grant constitutive autonomy to the German-speaking Community, by applying the federal principle of equality between federated entities.
Strengthening the coherence of skills in the German-speaking Community
Ecolo shares the objective of consistency in the skills exercised by the German-speaking Community.
In this perspective, Ecolo is open to examining the adjustments that should be made, within the framework of article 139 of the Constitution and/or through an expansion of cooperation agreements with other federated entities.
2 Among other indicators, it should be noted that Brussels is faced with very high unemployment with a rate of over 20% of unemployed people, while Brussels provides more than one job in six in Belgium; that it welcomes in its social, hospital or outpatient services up to 30% of people living outside; that it is suffering from a housing crisis; that it must face a population explosion.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Democracy – Political Ethics
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Democracy expresses the fundamental conviction that men and women belong to a human community that constitutes them equal, despite inequalities of conditions.
This is why the legitimacy of the rule of law is based on the participation of citizens.
Democracy nevertheless faces three important problems.
Firstly, it appears helpless in the face of the complexity of the issues and challenges that our society must face (climate disruption, increasing inequalities and poverty, employment crisis, etc.).
Secondly, the institutions on which it is based fail to integrate into public life the social classes that are economically, socially or culturally precarious.
Third, these institutions sometimes seem to widen, rather than close, the gap between the citizen and the State.
The globalization of issues and the expansion of the market lead to a shift in the decision-making process and highlight the democratic deficiencies of institutions, particularly at the international level.
The existing mechanisms of representative democracy allow the idea that democracy is reduced to the right to vote and can do without citizen participation and jurisdictional mechanisms protecting citizens' rights.
The shortcomings of our political system fuel a general disenchantment with democratic institutions.
The abuses and dysfunctions that have marked the news in recent years, particularly in Wallonia, have reinforced this feeling.
The political instability that has dominated since 2007 and the fall of the Government has now transformed it into open defiance.
In this perspective, Ecolo wants to propose another way of experiencing democracy.
A democracy that offers citizens the opportunity to participate fully, and which does not only feed on incantations in favour of a “new political culture” but also includes concrete commitments.
Ecolo's proposals
Developing participation
Ecolo wants to open public spaces to as many people as possible.
Providing everyone with the opportunity to participate fully in political decision-making means taking the democratic ideal seriously,
but also comes from the fact that the criteria for what constitutes a "reasonable" discussion can never be decided in advance: everyone can therefore bring their own ingredients to it.
For Ecolo, it is therefore necessary to supplement representative democracy, based on the designation of representatives elected by citizens, with mechanisms for the participation of the population, through which it can take ownership of the decision-making process.
Organize referendums with decision-making scope at all levels of power
Ecolo proposes to institute a legislative referendum at the federal, community and regional levels;
to make possible at the local level, alongside popular consultation, the organisation of referendums at the municipal and provincial levels;
and to allow in particular the holding of a referendum prior to the ratification of international treaties which imply a transfer of sovereignty.
The organisation of these referendums should naturally be surrounded by conditions and modalities of various natures.
In particular, no referendum could be held on proposals that contradict human rights – or related international conventions – or require a special majority or in fiscal matters.
Likewise, any referendum must naturally be accompanied by a process of public and fair debate.
Establish and amplify the role of popular consultations
In addition to the ability to organize referendums with decision-making scope for the most important decisions,
Ecolo wishes to expand the use of popular consultation, at the initiative of public authorities or a section of the population.
In particular, Ecolo wishes to improve the existing legislative framework (in particular to refine the rules of information and the mechanisms for monitoring procedures) and to extend the possibility of organising popular consultations at the regional level.
Providing new participatory tools
The wide opening of the deliberative process to citizens and the implementation of a culture of participation calls for the continuous irrigation of the political system through multiple channels, which may be, depending on the case, one-off or recurring, of vast scope or lesser ambition.
This involves opening up new forms of representation, combining field knowledge, scientific expertise and more traditional political representation.
In this context, Ecolo intends to develop:
o− participatory budgets at the local level;
o− citizens’ conferences, namely the instruction by a group of people drawn at random from files, as part of an improvement in public debate, in particular with regard to ecological questions, societal debates or long-term issues;
o− the generalization of public inquiry into environmental or planning matters;
o− local participation practices (neighborhood committees, user associations, etc.), acting both in terms of support and recognition;
o− the implementation, including for the procedures already mentioned, of the means necessary for the effective participation of the citizen:
transparency and predictability of procedures, transparency of documents, conduct of participation processes by an independent third party, motivation of the administration's actions.
Create a right of citizen legislative initiative
With a view to modernising the right to petition, Ecolo is in favour of creating a right of initiative, consisting of the obligation for the federal Parliament – ​​or a community or regional parliament, or even the European Parliament – ​​to include on its agenda and examine any proposed law, decree or ordinance,
or any resolution proposal, supported by 1% of the corresponding electorate (except proposals in contradiction with Human Rights, requiring a special parliamentary majority or in fiscal matters).
Renewing the advisory function
A large number of advisory councils in Belgium have the mission of advising governments at different levels of power, in a series of sectoral policies.
Their opinion must be taken into account, their rules must be clear to each of their members, and their operation must escape partisan instrumentalization.
To this end, Ecolo proposes in particular to simplify their operation,
to broaden their composition in order to move them away from a lobbying logic,
to strengthen their autonomy and their capacity to give opinions, to systematize the publicity of these opinions,
to cap operating expenses and limit the duration of mandates in time and accumulations.
Ensuring citizens have access to information
The development of citizen participation is based on a prerequisite, namely that everyone has free access to public decisions.
In other words, to be able to participate in public decision-making, one must be able to have access to information.
The right to be able to consult administrative acts and, in particular, acts preparatory to the final decision of the public authority may be enshrined in our Constitution (Article 32) or in instruments of international or European law (Aarhus Convention),
It nevertheless remains subject to difficulties and hassles on the ground, at different levels of power.
Consequently, Ecolo proposes to systematize active publicity of administrative acts, including that of opinions and preparatory acts for public decisions (opinions of the Council of State and other consultation bodies) and to develop communication media in this regard.
Putting the Cultural Pact up for debate and strengthening it
Ecolo intends to update and strengthen the action of the Cultural Pact with the aim of broadening the pluralism of cultural institutions by:
o− diversifying the composition of their bodies and involving user groups and professionals in the cultural sector alongside representatives of democratic political parties;
o− subordinating public funding to conditions of participation and equality of users:
information accessible to cultural actors, protection of categories not falling within any of the recognized philosophical/political trends, etc.;
o− extending its scope of application, in particular to the sectors of childhood, youth assistance, etc.;
o− strengthening the National Standing Commission of the Cultural Pact in its power of control and advice.
Modernizing the electoral system
Expand the right to vote and to stand for election
Although the right to vote does not in itself sum up democratic life, it constitutes the most obvious expression of the equality of rights enjoyed by citizens.
In this context, Ecolo is in favour of maintaining the obligation to vote.
Ecolo also demands the extension of voting rights at provincial, community/regional and European level for women of foreign nationality,
as well as granting the same persons the right to be elected at the same levels of power, as well as at the municipal level.
In addition, Ecolo supports the extension of the right to vote for Belgians living abroad in community/regional elections.
Ecolo also supports lowering the age of voting to 16.
Ecolo also wants the right to vote to be exercised by categories of people who, in fact, are currently excluded from it:
logistical support for people with physical disabilities, preservation and application of their rights to people with mental disabilities, creation of a reference address – or an “electoral” domicile for the homeless.
Improving the readability of electoral issues
The exercise of the right is truncated when it becomes impossible for the citizen to establish the link between his vote and the result of the election: elected candidates do not sit, non-elected candidates sit.
In order to make the exercise of the right to vote more transparent, Ecolo proposes to:
o− Prohibit simultaneous candidacies on electoral lists for several mandates at different levels of power between which there is a legal incompatibility;
o− establish an automatic resignation, in the event of election, with regard to mandates already in progress and legally incompatible with the mandate sought;
o− deter defectors by attaching two automatic effects:
the loss of all executive or derivative mandates exercised by the agent concerned, and the ineligibility of the same agent for any executive or derivative mandate for as long as his or her elective mandate(s) in progress at the time of his or her transfer have not ended;
o− in order to limit the influence of certain organised groups on the ballot, limit the number of preference votes that a voter can express to 3 per ballot;
o− encourage the publicity of possible pre-election agreements at the municipal level, by granting an electoral advantage to lists which, before the elections, submit an official declaration publicly expressing their desire to form a majority together.
Ensure transparency and fairness of the vote
Ecolo believes that, given the current state of technology, only voting on paper ballots, with manual counting by citizens designated for this purpose, can guarantee transparent and democratic control of the vote.
Ecolo is therefore calling for the maintenance – or reestablishment – ​​of paper voting and demands that no new modification to the voting or counting system – for example, counting by optical reading – can be adopted without the guarantee of control as democratic as that permitted by paper voting.
The Walloon and Brussels regions have taken this direction.
It is appropriate that the federal government follow suit.
In addition, the electoral campaign must also be able to take place in a calm manner, in a framework which encourages democratic debate and the confrontation between political projects.
The increase in the number of polls in the run-up to elections is likely to disrupt citizens' correct understanding of the issues, particularly given the absence of any guidelines.
Ecolo therefore proposes the adoption of a law to regulate polls, defining minimum ethical and methodological rules, requiring the publication with the results of the poll of the methodology applied for its preparation and prohibiting the carrying out and publication of any poll in the ten days preceding the elections.
Finally, despite the progress made in this area, electoral campaigns continue to give rise to certain excesses which are detrimental to the fairness of the vote.
Ecolo thus intends to consolidate the legislation applicable to electoral expenses and party financing, by reducing the volume of authorized electoral expenses.
– particularly at the level of lists and candidates, so that the overall volume of electoral expenditure tends to approach the amounts granted to parties in terms of public funding –
, by disciplining electoral displays and supplementing the current control of the Parliamentary Commission, upstream with a detailed opinion, or downstream through a right of appeal to a third party body (Court of Auditors or College composed of former parliamentarians and advisers to the Court of Auditors).
Ensuring pluralism within democratic institutions
Democratic control of public management establishes the legitimacy of public action and the democratic opposition exercises an essential responsibility in this regard.
It must be noted, however, that the electoral system includes a number of mechanisms which alter the proportionality of representation and reinforce without legitimate reason the hegemony of the dominant political force.
Ecolo proposes to ensure the proportionality of representation in the electoral system:
o− by reducing the 5% eligibility threshold provided for the election of the House of Representatives;
o− by reviewing the size of the electoral districts which are too small in order to elect at least 5 representatives in each district;
o− by standardizing the threshold for access to matching at 5% in regional and provincial elections;
o− by using a more proportional key (abandoning the imperial key) in local elections, like other ballots;
o− by ensuring the representation of the democratic opposition within the management bodies of derived entities (public companies, Public Interest Organizations (OIP), non-profit organizations).
Continue the democratic struggle against liberticidal parties
The fight against liberticidal parties primarily involves the quality of public policies
and through engagement in democratic debate, in the field of ideas and pedagogy.
This strategy should succeed in the medium term.
However, it may be insufficient in the short term.
Ecolo is also in favour of formulating, against liberticidal parties, a general constitutional principle of forfeiture of derived democratic rights (public funding and parliamentary allocations, representation within the management bodies of derived entities, access to information bulletins and electoral platforms),
and the extension of this principle to any liberticidal organization (subsidy, aid to the press, etc.).
In this context, it is the Constitutional Court which would hold the monopoly on judging the compatibility of the acts and programme of a party or a liberticidal organisation with the very institution of fundamental rights and freedoms.
Renewing representative democracy
Improving parliamentary democracy
The relationship between the legislative and executive powers remains profoundly unequal, with the government remaining, at the various levels of power, at the centre of the political system, while parliament struggles to assume its role of control and initiative.
This situation is not without inducing numerous pitfalls for the quality of democracy and the deliberation process.
Ecolo proposes to:
o− strengthen the power of proposal of parliament by facilitating the possibility of submitting legislative proposals from parliamentarians to the opinion of the Council of State;
o− strengthen the parliament’s capacity to control the government, by organizing the publicity of government decisions and the opinions given to it (union consultation, financial inspection, unpublished opinions of the Council of State, evaluation by the Court of Auditors, etc.),
by improving the monitoring of the action of the OIPs,
by modernizing the rules of public accounting,
by providing access to parliamentary groups to monitor the execution of budget appropriations;
o− strengthen the control mechanisms in international policy matters through three channels:
provision of human resources to Parliament to examine proposals for European directives or international conventions;
regular presentation by members of the Government of political notes (upstream) and evaluation notes (downstream) relating to files whose decision-making process falls under the responsibility of European and international bodies;
establishment of a permanent committee to monitor foreign policy.
The creation of the "Commission for the Control of Foreign Missions" currently underway constitutes a first step in this direction;
o− improve the publicity and openness of parliamentary work by ensuring the dissemination of debates via the Internet and by experimenting with their television broadcasting, as well as by improving the user-friendliness and functionality of parliamentary websites.
Evaluating public policies
The evaluation of public policies does not only represent, or even essentially, a managerial or budgetary tool.
It also presents a democratic challenge:
How can we make government activity visible without giving in to a technocratization of political control methods?
How to promote pluralistic expertise?
How to increase the participation of stakeholders interested in public policies?
Ecolo proposes to develop a genuine culture of democratic evaluation of public policies, involving: - as a fundamental principle, the need for the legislative power to exercise responsibility for the evaluation - upstream and downstream - of public policies;
o− the establishment of autonomous evaluation institutions;
Ecolo proposes to create a federal evaluation council, under the authority of parliament, responsible for regulating and guaranteeing the quality of evaluations;
Ecolo also proposes to involve the Court of Auditors and the Ombudsman Offices in the evaluation, whether it is the technical expertise of the former or the field knowledge of the latter;
o− the involvement of users and workers;
o− the establishment of a five-yearly evaluation procedure for public policies;
any legislation or policy, particularly in the event of a significant societal or budgetary impact or in the event of a high degree of uncertainty, should be subject to evaluation, within a period of 5 years, at the initiative of parliament – ​​or one of its committees, the government, mediation bodies or 1% of the electorate;
o− opening to citizens the meetings of the general assembly of OIPs and other derived entities.
Reforming political practices
The democratic regime is not based on universal suffrage alone, nor on representative institutions alone.
The legitimacy of political power comes as much from the quality of public governance, the proper use of public funds and the ethics with which public officials and managers exercise their responsibility in the service of the general interest.
The Walloon Region, the Brussels-Capital Region and the French Community made a series of commitments in this area when concluding the Government agreements in July 2009.
It is important that the same impulses are adopted at the federal level.
Make the function of parliamentarian and any local executive mandate incompatible
The problem of combining the role of parliamentarian with a local executive mandate – mayoralty, aldermanship and presidency of CPAS, or even presidency of an inter-municipal body or similar structure – appears central to the debate on public governance, as it poses major difficulties on several levels.
Indeed, such an accumulation does not contribute to the parliamentarian acting in the interest of all.
Furthermore, it gives rise to conflicts of interest: the federal deputy, the community and regional deputy are in charge of political control of the government, while the local executive representative exercises his functions within a subordinate authority, itself subject to the political and financial control of the Government, either fully and entirely at the level of the Region – supervision and disciplinary power – or in a piecemeal manner, depending on the skills, as regards the federal or community Government.
Finally, the role of parliamentarian constitutes a full-time job, paid as such, which must be carried out with the required availability.
Ecolo therefore wants to establish a legal incompatibility between the role of parliamentarian and any executive mandate at the local level.
The abolition of the system of ministerial impediments contributes to the same end.
Impose an ethics of representation on all representatives
Political representation suffers from four types of political pathologies: the accumulation of mandates, conflict of interests, concentration of power and clientelism.
Ecolo proposes several measures to prevent or cure them:
o− adopt a code of ethics in precise, clear and demanding terms;
This code of ethics cannot be left to the freedom of individuals but must be established by the legislator and accompanied by sanctions in the event of non-compliance;
In all cases, Ecolo will advocate for the harmonization of rules of ethics, conflicts of interest and remuneration in all assemblies, at federal, regional or community level;
o− establish as a criminal offence any intervention by public officials for the benefit of individual files with a judicial or administrative authority,
and violating the principle of separation of powers or the principle of equality of citizens before the law, or transgressing the code of ethics applicable to relations between public officials and citizens;
o− organize a system for presuming and controlling conflicts of interest;
o− prohibit the participation of ministers or parliamentarians in the management, administration or supervision of OIPs, mutual societies, trade union, employer, sectoral or professional organisations and companies of a certain size;
o− in addition to the automatic incompatibility to be established between the parliamentary function and the local executive mandate, organize a real decumulation of derived mandates,
in particular by limiting to 3 the number of director mandates that the same person can carry out within a derived entity, such as a public company, an intermunicipal company, an OIP or a similar structure;
o− regulate the activity of company auditors within public structures: rotation of auditor mandates after a term of 3 years, renewable once;
improving transparency in the awarding of contracts and systematizing competitive tendering;
strengthening the rules of financial independence by limiting the weight that entities under the same authority can represent in a firm's fees;
incompatibility between the exercise within the same authority of an auditor activity and a political function by the same person;
o− strengthen the rules relating to missions abroad, in particular by limiting the flat-rate amount of daily allowance.
Limiting remuneration for public office
Ecolo supports the development of a register of remuneration and various benefits for all public offices, in order to objectively and limit these remunerations, in particular according to responsibilities, skills and workload.
Ecolo also wishes to limit the non-pecuniary advantages linked to the exercise of certain mandates, and in particular to encourage the use of public transport and, failing that, service vehicles, to the detriment of company vehicles.
On a more general level, the legislation currently provides for a maximum authorised income for all political remuneration, set at 150% of the parliamentary allowance, or around €150,000 per year.
This ceiling is too high, especially since it only covers remuneration linked to the exercise of political mandates or functions and not those linked to certain special functions or other activities carried out in parallel.
Ecolo therefore wants to prioritize including all remuneration in the envelope subject to the overall remuneration ceiling, whether special or ordinary, public or private, resulting or not from political activities.
Ecolo also intends to gradually reduce this ceiling from 150% to 100% compared to the parliamentary allowance.
In addition, Ecolo considers it unacceptable that public officials can exercise their public responsibilities through shell companies, in order to receive their remuneration and thus evade personal income tax.
Ecolo therefore proposes to ban these bypasses.
Increasing the financial transparency of political parties
The legislation on election expenses and party financing has certain gaps.
Thus, it does not prohibit companies from making donations to certain non-profit organisations which gravitate around political parties, whereas this practice is completely prohibited with regard to parties.
Similarly, it authorises donations from individuals but imposes confidentiality of the identity of donors, which prevents verification of compliance with the ban on donations, direct or indirect, from companies or influential lobbies.
Ecolo proposes to assimilate non-profit organizations and other entities that gravitate around political parties to components of political formations, and to subject them to the same rules, both in terms of donations and with regard to the control of their accounting.
Furthermore, Ecolo supports the obligation for public officials to file annually, for example with the declaration of mandates and assets, a declaration of tax regularity, by which they certify that they are in order with regard to their tax obligations.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Democracy and Governance Axis Public service Governance
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Public service Governance
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Democracy is based on representative institutions and participatory processes and is achieved through political ethics.
It also bases its legitimacy on the public policies implemented to meet public interest needs.
Public authorities must therefore provide the entire population with the guarantees and services which ensure life in society in solidarity and equality, and ensure equitable access to common resources.
This action may require the direct production, by public authorities, of a given good or service.
It can also, if necessary, be exercised through regulation external to the actors.
In any event, it is not situated in a commercial relationship between supplier and customer but in a perspective of general interest.
In more than one sector, however, public service is no longer able to fulfil its missions of general interest, whether it is open to the appetite of the markets under the impetus of the European Union's competition policy, whether it is privatised as part of a short-term budgetary policy, or whether it is suffocated by a lack of investment and the participatory nature of its resources.
Furthermore, the European debate on the recognition of services of general interest protected by competition rules and whose development can be ensured by public authorities remains blocked within the European institutions:
The fight must therefore continue to protect essential public services such as health and education from the dogmas of free competition and the market.
Ecolo wants to reaffirm its deep attachment to public service, in order to provide the population with broad, united and equitable access to services which are an integral part of life in society.
In order to guarantee its future, Ecolo intends to modernize the public service.
This modernization will not be modeled on the most aggressive methods of the private sector, but on a social consensus on the aims of the public sector, mobilizing civil servants around a quality service, widely accessible, open to its social responsibilities.
Furthermore, the notion of public service must be redeployed, or even extended to goods whose management produces significant externalities.
When private intervention is necessary and the materials processed allow it, a strong regulator must be put in place to guarantee the protection of consumers, and in particular the most vulnerable groups.
This modernization must then allow the public service to become a driving force for the transformation of society, to enable it to face the challenges of our time.
Ecolo's proposals
Reinvesting in public service: establishing a broad and dynamic content of public service
Ecolo is in favour of defining a broad content of public service
in order to allow the widest possible access to all essential goods and services
, such as, in particular, water, energy, social and health services, education, public transport, postal services and waste management, in addition to services falling within the authority function of the State, such as justice or public security, for example.
The entire population must therefore be able to benefit from services
whose public authorities ensure the continuity and quality of services, whose access they guarantee to everyone by ensuring their optimal management and financing, and for which they report.
Most of these services are based on the use of a network and are therefore characterized by significant fixed costs.
The distribution of these costs between services and between users does not constitute a technical contingency, but results from a political decision.
Ecolo demands that these services be accessible to all citizens and that these costs be shared in a fair manner, like the progressive and fair pricing of water set up in Brussels at the initiative of Ecolo.
In this context, Ecolo proposes the application of progressive pricing resulting in the elimination of flat-rate charges, the setting of a modest price – or even the granting of free prices – for the first consumption tranches and their financing by tax and by the higher consumption tranches.
Ecolo also understands that when a basic service is offered by the market (mobile telecommunications or banking services, for example), the public authorities guarantee, also in this case, access to certain basic services for each consumer, as well as their level of quality.
Ecolo believes, however, that the implementation of this minimal service cannot be left to the freedom of operators and rely solely on an internal code of conduct for the sector, but that it requires active intervention by the public authority.
Ecolo therefore supports, in such cases, the establishment of a universal service, the content of which is imposed on the various operators by law and is specified through specifications, and compliance with which is monitored by a regulator.
Finally, Ecolo demands the inclusion of the principle of public service and universal service in the Constitution.
More generally, Ecolo believes that a series of sectors with social, economic, environmental or cultural impact cannot function properly without technical and political regulation of operators.
In this context, Ecolo is in favour, under certain conditions, of a so-called regulatory policy, by which the public authorities, through an independent authority, can control the minimum services to be provided, the operating conditions, as well as certain elements relating to pricing and the obligation to provide the universal service.
These conditions require that real constraints exist for operators to provide the required services (example: bonus-malus system for the operator),
that financial risks are distributed fairly between the public authority and the service provider,
that the award procedures and the results produced by the operator are disseminated in a transparent manner.
Finally, Ecolo demands the adoption of European legislation enshrining the notion of public service as a founding element of European society, its social cohesion and its sustainable development, and giving precedence to the general interest over the rules of competition and commercial profit.
Ecolo wishes, through this framework directive, to reaffirm the principle of subsidiarity applicable in the definition of public service missions,
guarantee the financing of public services according to the method chosen by the public authority concerned,
preserve the autonomy of political authority with regard to the property regime, establish full legal security,
and develop public services at European Union level where they could bring added value.
Finally, in this perspective, Ecolo defends a public service post office.
Along with SNCB, La Poste remains the largest public company in Belgium and, despite the many job losses since 2004, one of the largest employers in Belgium.
We denounce the sale, by the purple government in 2005, of 50% of the shares of the Post to a private consortium (CVCPoste Danoise).
We also denounce, in a context of contraction of the postal market, the environmental consequences
, social (closure of post offices, job cuts, questioning of the social role of the Banque de la Poste, maximum pressure on workers)
and financial (significant bonuses for the private shareholder and threats to the liquidity of the Post Office) which resulted from this.
Conversely, we want to maintain a strong public postal service, contributing to the social network of the territory, guaranteeing both effective action and quality working conditions for its employees.
At European level, the Greens have always opposed the liberalisation of the postal market, which is due to take effect on 1 January 2011.
As part of the translation of this directive into Belgian law, we therefore request that proactive measures be taken so that the public operator is protected and that future private operators are subject to the same public service obligations (distribution frequency, geographical coverage, service provided, etc.)
and workers' rights (particularly in terms of salaries, since identical scales should be set for any private competitors of the Post Office and set within the framework of a joint committee to be created).
Redefining public service
Clarifying public service missions
For Ecolo, it is necessary to (re)define precisely the corporate purpose and public service missions, as well as the management and control structures enabling the achievement of these missions.
These elements must be subject to harmonization allowing for the clarification of public interest missions, the identification of the holder of public capital, the precise definition of the corporate bodies and the respective powers of the management, the board of directors and the supervisory authority, the rigorous supervision of delegations, the explicit reference to the regulator, a relative homogenization of the statutes of the different organizations and the insertion of sustainable development - and the obligation to effectively take it into account - in the corporate purpose of any public service.
For these purposes, the objectives to be achieved by each public service, the conditions – in particular equality, accessibility, continuity and reduction of the ecological footprint to be respected,
the resources allocated to this end and the achievement criteria must also be determined, within the framework of a management contract concluded between the public authority and the public interest body, applicable for a specific period.
In this context, Ecolo proposes that each public company responsible for carrying out public service missions be required to produce a multi-year business plan controlled by the management bodies.
Its implementation must be subject to an annual evaluation in parliament, with reference to the management contract.
Finally, Ecolo is committed to ensuring that the public resources invested meet the legitimate needs for which they were released as best as possible and that the expenditure incurred is subject to rigorous control.
Setting public services as an example
Ecolo considers that public services must meet specific requirements of social responsibility and supports in this respect:
the systematic inclusion of environmental, social and ethical clauses in public contracts,
in order to encourage in particular the use of materials, products and techniques that have the least impact on the ecological footprint
and to position public authorities as responsible actors, socially and environmentally, in public procurement;
the assignment to public authorities, including at the level of their real estate policy, of environmental management objectives, relating in particular to the rational use of energy, the reduction of the quantity of waste and recycling or the definition of travel plans for their staff;
the use of computer software using open standards, with the aim of guaranteeing the interoperability of systems, securing the archiving of digital content and guaranteeing the sustainability of electronic access to digital content.
Furthermore, Ecolo considers that public authorities must constitute a reference in their role as employer, whether in terms of harmony in working relations, promotion of equality between men and women, integration of disabled people, openness to people of foreign origin or public employment offers to less qualified workers.
In this context, Ecolo particularly supports:
the primacy of the status over the employment contract in organizing employment relations, since the status of agents gives them protection against arbitrariness and protects them from pressure, with the aim of enabling them to ensure the primacy of the general interest, the continuity and impartiality of the public service3;
the status also organises the procedures to ensure equal access to employment and the selection of the most suitable candidates, while the contract allows the authority to act without any particular procedure;
therefore, statutory recruitment must be favoured, based on a public call for applications and after successful completion of an objective examination competition;
the organization of a flat career system, allowing for dynamic development without changing grade, but progressing in terms of salary scale after specific periods of time;
in parallel with this career system, greater mobility within the civil service, by extending and simplifying the possibilities of mutation and transfer, including between levels of power, through respect for a common base in terms of objectification of recruitment and career development;
a moderation in terms of salary tension;
In this sense, Ecolo opposes the granting of additional salaries and/or excessive benefits to senior civil servants, whether or not they are under mandate;
the overall remuneration of senior officials cannot reasonably exceed, taking into account all of their activities, 150% of the parliamentary allowance;
where possible, increasing the territorial decentralisation of the administrative services of the federal State and federated entities, in order to achieve a more balanced geographical distribution allowing for an overall reduction in journeys and an improvement in the quality of life of staff;
a training policy aimed at strengthening, in addition to an ethic of general interest, the acquisition of knowledge and skills required for the execution of public service missions;
This training policy will be combined, for management positions, with the acquisition of a management certificate and the successful completion of a selection test;
With this in mind, Ecolo proposes to create a federal administration school responsible for implementing and monitoring this training policy and this patent system, as well as the certification of experience and skills acquired;
Ecolo also intends that each agent be recognized with a right equivalent to that of educational leave.
Making public service more accessible to citizens
Ecolo intends to direct public service towards serving the public and to place the citizen at the heart of the administrative apparatus, by reinforcing the availability of information and by implementing a real reception strategy.
For Ecolo, the administration must provide accessible and understandable information.
This information must therefore be free because access to it is a right and not a favor.
It must be easily accessible, whether electronically or visually (notice boards, written materials, etc.).
It must be presented in a complete and comprehensible manner.
It involves an obligation of active publicity and the definition of standards for processing files (obligation to refer to the competent administration, possibility of direct contact with the agent processing the file, transmission of an acknowledgement of receipt within ten days with information on the response time, etc.).
Finally, it requires ensuring access for all to electronic administration, in particular by expanding the free provision of interactive terminals useful for this purpose and ensuring their accessibility for all audiences (visually impaired people, those with reading difficulties or those who are not proficient in IT tools, etc.).
In the same vein, it is important to simplify the administrative environment, by coordinating the procedures that require it, by systematizing the examination of the readability of any draft regulation by a cell specialized in administrative simplification, by eliminating superfluous formalities, by prohibiting an institution from requesting a copy of the same document several times.
Finally, Ecolo intends to promote a transparent assessment of the general quality of services in the provision of public goods: quality of water or air, energy supply, punctuality and quality of transport.
This assessment is particularly necessary for situations where an external regulator is in charge of the service.
It must also be clear and accessible to all (notice boards in municipalities, monitoring website, air quality indicator terminals).
In order to guide the user through the administrative maze and to respond to the pitfall of 'pingpong' administrations which pass the buck
, Ecolo proposes to install unique, multidisciplinary reception areas common to all administrations in direct or indirect contact with the public, in a decentralized organization across the territory, for example at the level of each administrative district.
The creation of public service centres could also be considered, at the local level, to offer a common point of contact but also a real place for exchanges and services:
municipal administration branch, public water, gas and electricity service counter, postal or public transport services, information on all matters that may interest citizens (environmental bonuses, health service opening hours, scholarships, etc.).
In the same perspective, Ecolo proposes to extend – in consultation with staff representatives – the opening hours of offices in order to take into account the new social, professional and family realities of the population, and to provide the necessary resources to ensure the follow-up of telephone calls and avoid excessively long periods of waiting online.
Ecolo believes that complaints are elements that must be used to improve the service provided to the public.
Ecolo thus wishes to extend the role of mediators, through whom administrations can see their actions subject to a non-contentious appeal.
Ecolo is thus defending more flexible conditions for referral, the extension of the scope of action of mediators to public service missions delegated to third parties, and their competence to raise preliminary questions before the courts.
It is still necessary to establish an effective and fair system for resolving internal dysfunctions within the administration.
In fact, the mediator's role does not allow for intervention upstream in the event of a dispute between an agent and his administration.
Ecolo is therefore calling for a strengthening of the mechanisms for receiving, processing and arbitrating complaints for abuse or internal dysfunction within the administration.
Finally, Ecolo demands that linguistic legislation at regional and local level be adapted to the needs of citizens.
Strengthening the efficiency and impartiality of public authorities
Objectifying public decisions
Too many public officials and structures consider that certain citizens are more equal than others.
These are their clients, that is, the citizens whose votes they are trying to buy in exchange for services or promises.
However, every time a nepotism pushes a file to the top of the pile, for a job, for a promotion or for a subsidy, it is the principle of equality between citizens which is undermined and, at the same time, the rule of law and democracy.
Every time a piston pushes a file over the stack, the entire stack is damaged.
Ecolo therefore proposes to objectify public decisions by applying transparent and organised procedures, including a prior definition of the criteria for assessing public authority, complete and precise information for potential applicants, rigorous motivation for any decision in relation to these criteria and a certain amount of publicity after the fact for the decisions taken.
This process of objectification applies in particular to the granting of subsidies or the recruitment of agents in the civil service.
Implement a genuine mandate system at the head of the administration
Senior civil servants exercise a certain responsibility in the conduct of public policies.
It is therefore appropriate to ensure that the administration is run by the most competent agents, and that the public authority can govern in a relationship of trust with the senior civil service.
This approach has been distorted for several decades, by the appointment – ​​almost always for life – of senior officials on a generally partisan basis and sometimes without regard for skills.
Ecolo proposes to implement a reformed mandate system, by which the government would appoint general civil servants for mandates of a limited duration to the legislature, from a pool of candidates holding a public management certificate issued by the federal administration school, after a training cycle and having also passed a highly demanding competition.
The School also considers it necessary to strengthen the incompatibilities between senior civil service and the exercise of a local executive mandate and intends to apply the same principles to the executive officers of public interest bodies and public enterprises.
Limit the number of staff in offices and paraadministration
Ecolo supports limiting the number of staff in ministerial offices to those necessary for their proper functioning, within the strict framework of the exercise of their skills.
The resources of a firm may not under any circumstances be used for the direct or indirect financing of a political party or for an electoral campaign.
The employees of a firm, while they must benefit from extended notice and political leave, cannot, however, be hired within the administration outside of the normal recruitment rules.
For Ecolo, it is also important to limit the development of para-administration (government agencies, etc.) and to apply the same recruitment requirements to it where appropriate (public call and objectification of skills).
Similarly, Ecolo requests that external expertise be used only under strict conditions, only when the necessary internal resources are not available and for tasks that do not fall within the structural missions of the administration.
Finally, Ecolo proposes to further associate the ministerial pole and the administrative pole, in particular by developing contacts between each office and the administration.
Reforming the governance of public interest bodies and derivative entities
The proper functioning of public interest organizations faces various difficulties: lack of independence and availability of administrators, excessive staff numbers, opacity of procedures.
However, these organizations play a necessary role for public authority.
In order to democratize the functioning of these organizations, Ecolo therefore proposes to set up a process for verifying the rules of incompatibility and conflicts of interest for public administrators.
Furthermore, the designation of managers of public interest bodies must be organised in an open and objective manner.
Finally, the management bodies of these organisations should be opened up to independent directors and, where appropriate, to user representatives.
Finally, it is useful to simplify structures which duplicate work or whose missions could be carried out more optimally by another organisation, and to better control subsidiaries.
Expanding the responsibilities and means of action of the Court of Auditors
The Court of Auditors is mainly responsible for monitoring the regularity of the use of public funds by the federal state and federated entities.
Even though its missions have gradually been expanded, particularly in terms of carrying out management analyses, its high level of expertise still appears to be underused.
Ecolo therefore proposes to increase the responsibilities and means of action of the Court of Auditors within the framework of the consolidation of the control of electoral expenditure and party financing, with regard to the democratic evaluation of public policies, as well as for the prevention of conflicts of interest.
Ecolo is also in favour of extending the general competence of the Court of Auditors to the municipal and provincial levels, as well as to any entity benefiting directly or indirectly from public funds or in which the public authorities hold at least 25% of the capital.
Ecolo finally considers it appropriate to instruct the Court of Auditors to control the allocation of funds collected by appeals to the generosity of the public at the federal, community or regional level.
At the same time, it is naturally appropriate to preserve the high quality of the Court's work, by clarifying the method of remuneration for certain missions and by strengthening the system for preventing conflicts of interest among its agents.
3 At the same time, the status cannot be synonymous with immobility or rigidity, otherwise its detractors would be able to call into question its legitimacy. The status of the civil service must therefore, where appropriate, be modernised. ; In particular, it cannot prevent the dismissal of agents who are found to be manifestly unfit following a regulatory and adversarial procedure.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Democracy and Governance Axis Equality between Women and Men
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Equality between women and men
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
In Belgium, despite the inclusion of this principle in the Constitution since 2002 and the adoption of the law on gender mainstreaming4 in 2007, many gender inequalities persist.
Corrective political measures are therefore still necessary in order to effectively eradicate these discriminations, both against women and men, in all areas of social life.
Thus, although the proportion of women in employment is increasing, both in Belgium and on a European scale, the employment rate for women remains lower than that of men.
In 2007, it was 55.3% compared to 68.7%.
Women on average hold lower quality and lower paid jobs.
They are more likely to be faced with involuntary part-time work and unemployment, as well as career breaks, which affect their right to retirement and partly explain the situation of poverty in which many of them find themselves.
The pay gap still exists in Belgium and fluctuates between 15 and 25% in 2009.
The ageing of the female population must also attract attention and impose an approach to gender needs.
When it comes to mobility, it is often women who organize their trips according to their day and are more likely to use modes of transport other than their own car.
Women are also the most frequent victims of violence: harassment, sexual and domestic violence, against all categories of women.
Equality is therefore an important objective, both in terms of rights and social achievements.
But equality does not mean carbon copy.
Ecolo wants to go beyond the notion of similarity to develop a real pact between women and men.
Freed from unfair discrimination, more autonomous in their rights and duties, women and men will thus be ready to build a society fulfilled in its masculine and feminine dimensions, a truly equal society for finally sustainable development.
Women and men of Ecolo highlight proposals in all areas.
Sharing responsibilities between women and men requires a redefinition of roles with the aim of equality and quality of life.
Finally, Ecolo reaffirms its desire to do politics differently.
Equality between women and men is part of this.
Thus, in its operation, Ecolo has committed to a structured policy of equality, a policy of gender mainstreaming.
Thus, the measures taken within it concerning its operation, the political notes, etc. pay particular attention to equality between women and men and must be the subject of regular evaluations.
4 Gendermainstreaming is the (re)organisation, improvement, development and evaluation of policy processes, with the aim of incorporating a gender perspective into all policies and at all levels, by all actors concerned with the implementation of the policy (Council of Europe, 1998).
Ecolo's proposals
Combating violence against women
Violence against women is rooted in inequality between women and men and must be reframed within a broader effort to eliminate all gender discrimination.
The 2010-2014 National Action Plan to combat violence between partners has been extended to other forms of gender-based violence.
This development is positive and must be strengthened.
Developing prevention
Prevention in terms of physical or moral violence against women requires a political, scientific and sociological approach in order to understand how our society tolerates this violence, or even produces and provokes it.
The collection of numerical data, statistics, research and studies must make it possible to obtain a regular overview and effective evaluations5.
It would be useful to promote psychological research on the subject.
This policy must be concerted and coordinated with all services and actors in the field.
Ecolo also intends to support and increase initiatives to raise awareness of sexual and emotional life and believes that the “Workshops on emotional and sexual life” initiated by day shelters and support centres for people with disabilities should be generalised6.
Strengthen and finance aid for victims
The policy to combat violence suffers from a lack of recurring resources to develop multidimensional and long-term work, as well as sufficient support for victims.
However, a particular and specific response is necessary to address the double discrimination that women may suffer in terms of violence.
All victim support structures (police, doctors, planning centres, reception centres, emergency and emergency aid services, victim support groups, youth support, etc.) must be strengthened in terms of numbers, personnel, financial resources and training for supervisors.
A 24-hour service must be provided (reception center and telephone line).
They must be coordinated within the framework of concerted action at all levels, with the main and priority objective of supporting and assisting victims.
Adapting laws to strengthen the fight against violence against women
Legislation on violence against women should be assessed and improved with a view to better aligning the laws with the judicial system, in order to increase the deterrent effect on (potential) aggressors.
Beyond that, Ecolo wishes to extend the possibility of recourse to collective action to associations defending women against domestic violence.
It is also necessary to develop a uniform legal definition of the crime of trafficking in women and, on the basis of this definition, to introduce criminal sanctions against those who commit this crime.
Concerning genital mutilation, a real desire to apply the law punishing the perpetrators of these practices (article 409 of the Penal Code) must be included in our country's judicial policy7.
Ecolo has also tabled a motion for a resolution with a view to improving vigilance and support for girls and young women under threat, and also to enable reimbursement by INAMI of compensation for genital mutilation.
Finally, it is necessary to combat forced marriages, which are increasingly common in Europe.
They are recognized by the UN as harmful traditional practices and forms of gender discrimination.
It is therefore essential to ensure awareness among parents, young girls (informing them about their rights), young people in general and social workers.
Along the same lines, honour killings should also be stopped.
Banish sexism… and stereotypes
Sexism is an exacerbated expression of the stereotypes that structure our society.
This problem, which is as fundamental and structuring of social relations, requires, like racism, the establishment of a specific legal system.
Ecolo has tabled a bill aimed at establishing legislation that would punish acts, comments and publications of a sexist nature and allow associations to take legal action in this regard.
For Ecolo, it is also about fighting against sexist stereotypes through awareness campaigns in schools, businesses, etc. and by banning advertising that reinforces gender stereotypes.
Combating pimping and human trafficking
Environmentalists are engaged in a fight against all forms of human exploitation, whether in the context of trafficking or pimping.
Along this path, there are a multitude of actions to be undertaken, at all levels, to stop the mechanism of trafficking, exploitation and all modern forms of slavery.
In the medium term, it is about ensuring a change in mentalities and deep and structural responses to major societal issues.
Ecolo has defined a plan8 in which it proposes in particular:
to develop prevention policies: socio-economic measures, information campaigns, education on gender equality;
to make controls on places where forms of sexual exploitation are detected more rigorous;
to better inform independent prostitutes of their rights and obligations, particularly tax-related, while knowing that this system will not be of interest to people in an illegal situation, who represent the vast majority of prostitutes;
to support associations that support and inform prostitutes;
to update data on clients and their behavior and, on this basis, develop listening centers and information and awareness campaigns for clients on the system (links with organized crime) in which they are involved, whether in “classic” prostitution or in human trafficking.
Continue to support exploratory marches
Developed over more than 10 years in several cities around the world, exploratory walks are a tool for analyzing the urban environment in the form of a field survey by groups of women who, most often victims of urban violence, are best placed to identify elements likely to cause risks of aggression and affect their feeling of security.
Combating professional and salary inequality
In 1966, the workers of FN Herstal went on strike to obtain a right: "Equal pay for equal work".
Since then, laws9 prohibit any discrimination in salary based on gender and require equal treatment between men and women.
But the reality is quite different: wage gaps persist, and there are a series of other forms of discrimination on the labour market.
First of all, there is a vertical segregation of labor.
The higher you go in the hierarchy, the fewer women you find, a phenomenon commonly called "the glass ceiling" which leads to salary discrimination for women, who do not see their experience and their diploma valued monetarily and in terms of responsibilities in the same way as men.
There is also horizontal segregation of labor.
Women's employment is concentrated in a small number of occupations and sectors of activity10.
In these sectors, work is not treated in the same way as in male-dominated sectors, which leads to discrimination.
Finally, these gaps and discriminations are not without consequences on women's pensions and on their quality of life.
Women thus represent 80% of poor employees.
Implement assessment tools
Closing the wage gap begins with the use of assessment tools.
In the same way that companies are obliged to publish their accounts and financial statements, Ecolo proposes to supplement the legislation concerning the social balance sheet with an analysis of the distribution of positions by gender and by salary level, taking into account the extra-legal advantages attributed to the different functions.
The FPS Employment and the Equal Opportunities Service should regularly publish model pay slips based on positions and responsibilities.
Taking concrete initiatives in social law
To combat wage inequality and improve the structure of the labour market, concrete actions must also be taken, such as:
to raise awareness among labor inspectors about the problems of pay inequality;
to describe and classify functions based on objective and legal criteria;
maintain the right to unemployment benefits for workers with forced and involuntary part-time work;
oimprove the protection granted to the weakest people in the labour market (for example by increasing the guaranteed minimum wage), and outside the labour market (linking social benefits to well-being).
Combating involuntary part-time work and the deregulation of work
Inequality persists in the proportion of involuntary part-time jobs, depending on whether they are allocated to women or men, which leads to unequal consequences both in terms of salary and social rights.
Ecolo favors the status of full-fledged worker.
Ecolo is calling for the establishment of permanent monitoring of part-time work and its development in the different sectors concerned, as well as of the various forms of employment contracts that coexist.
The most striking example is certainly that of service vouchers:
mainly occupied by women, they have contributed to the increase in involuntary part-time work and precarious contracts, as well as to increased deregulation and flexibility of work.
Share time and extend paternity leave
Equality between men and women also involves equal treatment in their family choices.
For example, regarding paternity leave, Ecolo has always called for compulsory leave, in addition to that of the mother, so that the father can assume his role.
Such equality would also help reduce discrimination in the labour market, where only women are the source of absence from work due to childbirth.
In March 2010, the European Union agreed to extend the minimum parental leave to 4 months per parent11.
This decision applies to all workers, regardless of their type of contract, and will require changes to Belgium's internal law, in consultation with the social partners.
Ecolo advocates that the extension of parental leave periods be spread over the 3 years after the birth of the child according to the need for rest time (not just the months after giving birth) and that parental leave be extended to the mother's wife.
Finally, Ecolo proposes to review the periods considered as work in order to take better account of periods of work stoppage, linked for example to maternity or to the choice (female or male) to stop working to play a role in the family sphere.
Promoting female entrepreneurship12
Ecolo is at the origin of the realization of a real social status for assisting spouses.
The system came into force in all its dimensions in July 2005.
However, there is still a long way to go.
Women's independent activities are generally more restricted, with less capital and more difficult access to credit.
They often work alone.
In short, the types of activities that do not allow you to rest or to start or expand a family.
It is therefore appropriate to consider the specificities of women and to adapt, among other things, the reception of children and the hours of reception centers13.
Ensure equal pay and a decent pension for women14
Wage inequalities between women and men persist and are deeply linked to the structure of the labor market and the patriarchal structure of our society.
It is therefore appropriate:
- to insist on the necessary upgrading of the employment profile of women and professional and salary equality;
- to put an end to the loss of income caused by maternity leave or a career break;
- to pay particular attention to this dimension, especially since women – and therefore children – are at a higher risk of poverty and social exclusion;
- to ensure the strengthening of women who occupy important positions (negotiation skills, fight against stereotypes and prejudices with regard to women's abilities, etc.) and to break the "glass ceiling";
11 With at least one month mandatory for the father.
12 For more information, see Chapter PMEIndépendants of the 2010 Ecolo program platform. 13 See on this subject our proposals from the 2009 Ecolo program, Book III, Chapter 1 “Childhood”.
14 For our proposals on women's pensions, see Chapter PensionsAînées of the 2010 programmatic platform.
- to pay particular attention to vulnerable groups in the job market (non-natives, those with little education, single parents, people with disabilities, etc.).
Furthermore, "the consequences of the salary difference also remain perceptible for life, until the pension is built up."
15 Ecolo proposes:
to raise the lowest pensions so that pensioners live on pension incomes above the poverty line;
equal pay during a career is certainly a relevant response in this regard since the legal pension is based on a career;
but we will have to act further so that no more pensioners (man or woman) are confronted with the risk of poverty;
to allow everyone access to the 2nd pension pillar if it were to continue to develop;
to prohibit, at the level of the second pillar, insurers from taking into account, in their actuarial calculations, the differences between the life expectancy of men and that of women (or at least a difference between men and women);
to individualize rights.
Individualize rights and combat tax inequalities
Designed at the end of the Second World War, social security includes a "family" dimension, of a woman's dependence on her spouse, which remains strong in all its components and is essentially manifested by the coexistence of direct rights and derived rights.
In other words, each individual obtains rights based on their contribution, but also on their family situation.
This causes difficulties and leads to inequalities.
As a result, many women receive social benefits without ever having paid contributions.
Other women see the benefits they receive reduced or even eliminated due to a change in their family situation (for example, if they become cohabiting).
An equal contribution therefore does not give rise to equal compensation, but is modulated according to the situation of the social welfare recipient's household.
We also note that the concepts of "cohabitant", "single person", "dependent person" do not have the same definition depending on the social security sectors.
Individualize social rights
For Ecolo, the objective to be achieved is the individualization of social rights.
Each adult would pay individual social contributions which would open up specific rights, regardless of their family situation and how it evolves.
This requires a deep reform of the system, in a progressive manner, taking into account acquired rights.
In the pensions sector16, it is necessary to start by level and by age cohort, so as to allow everyone to adapt to the new rules.
Ecolo now rejects any extension of derived rights.
On the contrary, Ecolo proposes that the question of equal treatment between different ways of living together be an opportunity to change the "familialist" conception of social security and to initiate the application of the principle of individualization of rights.
Combating tax inequalities
Ecolo proposes to reform the Personal Income Tax (IPP) with a view to individualisation equivalent to that proposed for social security: in this perspective, the marital quotient should be replaced by specific rights in tax matters.
15 The gender pay gap in Belgium – 2009 Report, IEHF.16 For our proposals regarding women’s pensions, see Chapter PensionsAinées of the 2010 programmatic platform.
There is real discrimination between men and women here too, although it is very difficult to obtain tax statistics broken down by gender.
However, this is an elementary basis for assessing the contributory share of each person based on their income.
Ecolo proposes that research be conducted on the cost/benefit of gender-sensitive taxation, that tax statistics be available with a breakdown by gender and that a popularization tool be developed to understand taxation and the construction of inequalities between men and women.
Ensuring equality between women and men in Europe and in North-South relations
Support the adoption of the most favored European
Europe has developed the legislation of the Member States by laying the legal foundations of the principle of equality and adopting fourteen directives on the subject.
However, we are witnessing positions being taken in different countries calling into question certain women's rights such as the right to abortion.
These positions pose a risk of a decline in women's rights in Europe.
Ecolo proposes to relay the proposal to harmonise upwards the conditions of European women by making them benefit from the most advanced law and thus aligning, in each area, with the most favourable clauses existing in the countries of the Union.
Supporting migrant women
Migrant women still face particular difficulties: racism, illiteracy, access to qualifying training, discrimination at school and at work, lack of information about their health and legal difficulties (repudiation, parental abduction, etc.).
The application of family law of the country of origin, imposed by international law, is, moreover, often harmful to women.
In Western countries, for example, the majority of honour crimes take place within immigrant communities.
Women are often isolated and left on the fringes of the host society and are more exposed to violence.
A policy of "positive discrimination" remains necessary to help them better address these problems and thus open up real citizenship to these women, essential players in a rich and harmonious multicultural society.
Advocating for cooperation policies that combine sustainable development and gender
Ecolo proposes that Belgian cooperation systematically integrates, in all phases of the programs, a cross-cutting approach to gender and sustainable development and that at least 50% of public aid be devoted to programs that combine these two dimensions.
The use of gender-specific indicators should be mandatory.
The approach of the guide for the development of “empowerment” indicators carried out by the “Women and Development” Commission in 2007 must be supported and proposed to NGOs, field staff, experts, etc.
Ecolo also proposes that, within the framework of bilateral aid, Belgium allocates its aid to the implementation of programmes for equality between women and men as well as to support a "gender" budget established by each country.
Policies strengthening access to sexual and reproductive rights and taking into account the real needs of populations in the fight against violence against women – particularly HIV/AIDS – will be given priority.
Ecolo also intends that in the negotiations of agreements with certain countries, the consequences of the exploitation of natural resources on the situation of women be taken into account, as well as the risks of violence against them in the areas of exploitation.
It is also appropriate to support the participation of women in political life and to strengthen their role in conflict prevention and resolution as well as in reconstruction processes.
Finally, Ecolo supports a genuine agrarian reform that guarantees women and men the same rights over their land: access, control and "security" of access, in order to give them the means to produce and sell quality produce by integrating corrective conditions into the agreements of aid and cooperation programs.
Other proposals
Ensuring women's access to health care
One in four women consider their health to be poor.
Stress, pace of life, family that comes before everything else, lack of means... Ecolo offers among other things:
- to adapt anti-smoking policies to new developments, particularly among young girls, who are more likely to smoke despite anti-smoking campaigns.
Women are also those who are most concerned about the health of “others”: parents, children, brothers/sisters, etc. This situation risks getting worse with the challenge of aging.
Ecolo is therefore proposing a series of measures for women healthcare providers, to put an end to the loss of income caused by a career break...
Adopt and implement a plan to optimize the alimony fund
In 2003, the Alimony Claims Service (SECAL) was created within the FPS Finance.
A review is necessary.
A first step has been taken but it is not yet the dream tool and the concrete effects on women (especially) and men (much more rarely) who experience difficulties in recovering these debts are still awaited.
In this context, Ecolo proposes:
to carry out a public information campaign to raise awareness of SECAL;
to provide explicit tools to judges, notaries and lawyers involved in marriage, divorce or separation proceedings to communicate to their clients;
to estimate the financing needed to meet the demands and respond to the needs of all single-parent families affected by unpaid debts;
to remove the income ceiling that gives access to advance systems17;
to create the possibility of automation via SECAL18;
to create a federal database for all decisions and judgments relating to alimony, and accessible if necessary by SECAL;
to organize mediation by the public prosecutor, to help the “single parent”, in the event of difficulty, to assert a right to child support;
to assess the consequences that will arise from the development of joint custody.
17 Currently, the threshold is set at €1,224 net (year 2008) 18 In Quebec, this simple measure has made it possible to reduce non-payment from 40% to 1%.
Making public services more gender-balanced
Ecolo proposes to make the concern of gender analysis essential in the nomination and recruitment processes in the public sector.
The system of renewable mandates after evaluation aims to ensure that the principles of objectification of skills and political responsibility are compatible in the process of appointing certain senior officials.
In this context, it is appropriate to integrate, with equal skills, a gender balance.
Making dual parentage possible
Passing on a family name is an act of great significance, both practical and symbolic.
The legislation must be revised so as to make equally visible the role of both parents in the transmission of life.
Ecolo proposes to provide for the visibility of both parents (dual filiation) in the legal processes of transmitting the family name to children by giving them the name of both their parents.
Ecolo has tabled a bill to this effect.
5 Ecolo advocates the continuation and expansion of the development of a series of indicators reflecting the complexity and diversity of women's situations (violence, income, poverty, etc.) ("gender" statistics). 6 See on this subject our proposals from the 2009 Ecolo programme, Book II, Chapter 5 “Disabled people”.
7 The new article 409 of the Penal Code quite explicitly criminalizes acts of female genital mutilation. This is about affirming the value of the physical and psychological sexual integrity of women and the prohibition of barbaric practices. The target is people who practice mutilation but also those who set up circuits to organize their practice, including by traveling to a foreign country where it can be practiced more easily. 8 See on this subject “The working avenues for Ecolo” adopted by the Federation Council on March 16, 2001.
9 There has been an accumulation of commitments and principles since 1975. At the European level, there is a directive, a code of conduct, action programmes, indicators (2001). At the Belgian level, there is a law, collective labour agreements, a classification of functions and gender mainstreaming. 10 These jobs are concentrated in sectors such as: health, social services, education, retail, public administration, business services, hotels and restaurants.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Democracy and Governance Axis Information Society
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Information society
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Today, the “information society” has become a reality.
Behind these words lie a series of questions and issues related to the use of information and communication technologies in our daily lives: television, radio, electronic press, blogs, social media, Twitter, websites, telephony, GSM, video games.
The era of information and communication technologies (ICT) opens up infinite creative and participatory potential: content creation, interactivity, global exchanges, access to information and cultural content represent fabulous levers for social emancipation and freedom of expression.
At the same time, their growth raises new questions, particularly ethical and social ones, which lead Ecolo to point out that fundamental rights are universal.
The right to share, the right to privacy, freedom of expression, the right to learn, the right to access knowledge, the right to assemble and even consumer rights are all values ​​that must also apply in the context of ICT.
Ecolo intends to ensure the conditions for the success of an information society by guaranteeing access and participation for all, by supervising its development through an appropriate legislative framework.
Ecolo's proposals
Ensuring an information society for all
Promoting the participation of everyone in the information society
To ensure that ICT does not become a new social divide, it is important to promote everyone's access to and participation in these new media.
To this end, Ecolo proposes in particular:
to guarantee fast internet for all by including it in the universal service (in the same way as the postal service or access to electricity) and to further support access to equipment and connection at reduced prices;
to combat the digital divide by increasing the number of reception areas that offer equipment and human support for people who want to learn new technologies;
to maintain open source, an open technical language and data traffic: anyone must be able to participate in the construction of an information society, without having to pay royalties or reinvent a language to communicate with other information systems;
open protocols and standards, labeled by a public standard, will also make it easier to integrate access methods adapted to people with disabilities;
finally, Ecolo defends the principle of net neutrality19;
o-to ensure that government websites are designed according to W3C (World Wide Web Consortium) accessibility standards so as to meet the specific needs of people with disabilities;
o-to systematize the use of free software in the public sector (public authorities, administrations, schools, etc.).
However, for Ecolo, ensuring access for all does not mean forcing everyone to live in a virtual universe.
It is therefore appropriate, especially in the context of public services, to maintain a non-technological version of services to society.
Protect individual and collective freedoms
New technologies are being introduced into many areas of daily life: searching for information, banking transactions, online purchases, reservations of all kinds, exchanges between friends (emails, virtual networks, etc.) or with public authorities (taxes, VAT, etc.).
In this context, personal information is increasingly easily disseminated and accessible to others.
At another level, devices such as surveillance cameras and traceable GSMs represent potential intrusions into public and private spaces: it becomes technically possible to track an object or a person at any time and in any part of the world.
While the use of these devices is spreading rapidly, the ethical questions raised by these devices have not, to date, been the subject of any real societal debate in our country20.
There is an urgent need to fill this democratic gap so that the information society does not become a tool for restricting privacy and freedom of expression.
Ecolo wants to bring a broad debate within the federal parliament on the use of personal data by ICT.
To guarantee the primacy of individual and collective freedoms in the context of new technologies, Ecolo also proposes:
o-to limit and control the use of personal data by private firms (loyalty cards, postal subscriptions);
it is not uncommon for them to be, for example, transmitted to a third party for commercial purposes;
Ecolo therefore wants to strengthen the rules for the use of personal data and limit it as much as possible;
o-to limit and control the use of personal data by public authorities: the federal government has expanded the possibilities of collecting data in the context of security service investigations;
However, the various possible interactions between the national database and the Carrefour banks are already causing considerable concern: the flow of information is difficult to control, certain unscrupulous officials could unduly exploit this data, and the recording of certain data seems very irrelevant;
Ecolo is demanding that control of these files be strengthened21 and that citizens' access to data concerning them be facilitated;
o-to submit for advice to the Commission for the Protection of Privacy any project which is based on the collection or new use of personal data and to strengthen the actions and controls carried out by this Commission;
o-to prevent electronic means of authentication linked to citizenship (identity cards, passports, data relating to the monitoring of offenders, etc.) from being under the control of private organizations or companies;
o-to assess the impact of surveillance cameras before any extension of their use;
for Ecolo, democracy cannot feel comfortable in a space crisscrossed by surveillance cameras which disrupt the foundations of "living together" and the right to privacy;
the conditions of use of these cameras must be considered and indicators must be established in order to assess the relevance of these devices (installation locations, objectives pursued, personnel available to view the images and to intervene, results);
19 Net neutrality is a concept that network architectures and operators should not discriminate between applications using those networks.20 With the rare exception of surveillance cameras. 21 By activating the Privacy Commission and the P Committee.
o-to monitor the use of the electronic bracelet;
in addition to a series of considerations related to the alternative to detention, to psychosocial monitoring
, it is essential to limit the involvement of private companies to technological intervention: data management should under no circumstances be entrusted to them.
Adapting legal tools to the information society
Alongside ethical and professional issues, the exploitation of new information and communication technologies also calls into question our legal system.
: the laws which apply on Belgian territory are not necessarily so when the author of a website or the publisher of a television channel does not reside on Belgian soil, for example.
European standards on consumption and state aid also play a major role in the regulation of the information society.
In order to adapt legal tools to the information society, Ecolo proposes:
o-to boost the Internet Rights Observatory created in 2001, in order to transform it into a genuine federal advisory council for information and communication technologies;
to do this, its missions will have to be extended to non-economic issues, particularly ethics, its composition will have to be reviewed in order to strengthen the presence of non-profit sectors and civil society, and the publicity of its opinions and recommendations will have to be systematized in order to ensure that citizens are fully informed;
o-to participate proactively in the development of Internet rights at European level;
orstrengthen the means to fight against cybercrime and violent content, including in an international framework.
Supervising the commercialization of techniques and content
The exploitation of ICT also represents a considerable source of profit.
Telecommunications operators, leisure companies, Internet service providers, search engines and advertising lobbies of all kinds are rushing to the gate to occupy a strategic and profitable place in this new high-potential market.
Ecolo intends to support the establishment of an appropriate regulatory framework to guide the development of this market with a view to guaranteed access for all and a sustainable information society.
To do this, Ecolo proposes:
o-to reduce telecommunications prices which remain much higher in Belgium than in other European countries;
o-to allow everyone to choose or even develop their own software tools;
Ecolo thus wishes to combat the automatic presence of software imposed by hardware manufacturers, by applying more strictly the provisions aimed at combating unfair commercial practices as defined in the new law on market practices;
o-to maintain private copying rights on new media (PC, GSM, portable music players, etc.) and to ensure optimal management of copyright in the context of new media.
Establish a global license for downloading22
The Internet has become a gigantic “multimedia library”.
With the widespread availability of high-speed Internet connections, downloading cultural goods protected by copyright has become completely commonplace, particularly among young people.
We are also witnessing a new revolution with the galloping digitalization of books.
Artists, authors, producers, publishers, performers and the companies that manage their rights are seeing their jobs radically transformed.
The physical medium is disappearing, which raises the question of distribution and therefore of the remuneration of culture in our communication and information society.
In other European countries such as France, it was decided to introduce a technique for controlling Internet traffic in order to punish illegal downloading (HADOPI).
It turns out that its technical and political implementation is difficult.
Indeed, the cost of monitoring Internet users made necessary by the law is proving problematic, beyond the questions raised by this attack on the privacy of French citizens.
Furthermore, HADOPI will probably not allow a transfer of downloading habits to so-called legal downloading platforms, and therefore the effective payment of copyright.
To address these issues, Ecolo is proposing to introduce a “global license.”
This is a progressive contribution of a few euros, accompanied by a price freeze, automatically integrated into each monthly high-speed Internet subscription and for three different levels of download quotas.
The amount of global licenses will be determined annually by copyright management societies and Internet access providers.
Finally, Ecolo wants to objectify the reality of Internet traffic in Belgium and ensure that the Internet Rights Observatory analyses Internet traffic in a completely anonymous manner.
This would make it possible to objectify, while respecting privacy, the reality of downloading in Belgium and therefore the distribution of rights generated by this “global license”.
22 Ecolo has tabled a bill aimed at adapting the perception of copyright to technological developments, while preserving the right to privacy of Internet users.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity axis Ecological transition of the economy
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Ecological transition of the economy
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
The current economic development model has reached a turning point, that of the ecological transition of the economy, which is essential to respond to the multiple crises we are facing.
The social crisis.
Income inequality has widened, making the system both fragile and unfair:
Coupled with the lack of real regulation of the financial sector, these inequalities have allowed the subprime crisis and all its consequences, including, ultimately, the economic crisis which is now leading to a society of "full unemployment", with nearly 700,000 Belgians outside the labour market.
While inequalities are growing, the tax measures adopted supposedly to correct them are in reality contributing to their reinforcement.
Thus, according to the latest available statistics, from 1997 to 2007, pre-tax income inequality increased by 16% while after-tax income inequality increased by 22%!
Meanwhile, 15% of the Belgian population still lives below the poverty risk threshold (60% of the median income, currently €876 per month).
Ecolo intends to propose a change in the development model based on sustainable development and social justice, the only ways of providing lasting solutions to the crisis and promoting shared prosperity and individual development.
The climate crisis.
If we maintain the current mode of development, climate change seems inevitable.
To stabilise the climate, i.e. not to experience an increase in the global average temperature greater than 2°C (which would have enormous economic and social consequences), it would be necessary, at the global level, to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, including CO2, by at least 85% by 2050 compared to 1990.
Belgium must be among the leading countries that are transforming their economy and making it more sustainable, more balanced, more compatible with its environment.
Postponing this transition will make it more difficult and above all more costly! On the contrary, succeeding in this challenge is an extraordinary and mobilizing challenge.
In addition, another environmental crisis concerns us.
Our way of living and producing is destroying biodiversity, which is essential for life.
The ecological transition of the economy must take into account the challenge of preserving this irreplaceable natural heritage.
The energy crisis.
Not only does the climate challenge involve reducing our consumption of fossil fuels (oil, coal, gas), but the earth also has its limits, because its resources are not infinite.
The International Energy Agency estimates that we reached peak oil this year.
Demand for oil is becoming greater than supply, which inevitably causes prices to soar.
Yet our entire economy currently depends on fossil fuels.
The economic transition therefore requires massive investment in energy savings and in the production of renewable energies.
This policy should help Belgium and Europe save petrodollars and gain energy independence in an increasingly complex world.
The democratic crisis.
The gap between citizens and their representatives is growing.
The former are waiting for increased well-being, but the old recipes no longer serve to meet expectations or the primary objective of any policy, which is the prosperity of all.
Currently, the benchmark value is GDP: the prosperity of a country is measured according to the growth of wealth produced, regardless of the manner, regardless of the consequences on the well-being of individuals or on the environment.
For Ecolo, prosperity corresponds to the development and fulfillment of people, to social cohesion, to well-being and quality of life, to a healthy and quality environment.
Economic development must first and foremost serve the needs of humanity.
Finally, the economic and financial crisis.
Companies are stuck in a logic of competitiveness at all costs and subject to unbridled competition which, without common rules and strong public regulation, can hardly lead to sustainable and balanced development.
Under pressure from the WTO, the global economy is organizing this competition without really taking into account the challenges of our century: energy, the environment and climate, employment, social justice, health, education, well-being.
States are too often governed by economic variables alone.
Environmentalists want to reverse the current logic.
Finance cannot guide economic choices and the individual search for profit concentrated in the hands of a few large shareholders cannot guide economic policy choices.
Rather, a state's economic policy should serve its economic and social development with a view to sustainability and balance.
To get out of these crises and the dead ends to which current policies are leading us, Ecolo proposes to mobilize the whole of civil society, the economic and political world around a Green Deal, the essential features of which we outline here but the contours of which will have to be clarified collectively, within the framework of social consultation but also with civil society and citizens.
It is about investing in the future, directing economic development towards sustainability and prosperity, supervising and regulating finance and the economy, and ensuring a fair distribution and redistribution of the wealth created to develop collective services and social security.
At the initiative of Ecolo, the employment-environment alliances currently being developed within the governments of the Brussels Region and the Walloon Region are a first step in this direction, at the level of economic development.
The federal state must continue along this path and strengthen it using the economic policy levers at its disposal, but must also extend it to the issues of regulation and redistribution for which it exercises primary responsibility.
Ecology is the future of the economy.
It is the entire economy that we intend to mobilize within this Green Deal and which will thus be able to capture the benefits of less energy-intensive and more environmentally friendly economic processes, but also the jobs of tomorrow, including in specifically green sectors (biotechnology, energy efficiency, pollution control, recycling and reuse, urban renovation, etc.).
More broadly, the more our economy is at the forefront in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions, the more chance we will have of saving our climate, the more we will place our economy in the future that is imposed on us.
Ecolo's proposals
Investing and guiding the economy for new prosperity
Implement a green investment plan at Belgian and European levels
Although the recession seems to be behind us, the return to economic activity capable of creating well-being for all is still very weak and fragile.
Ecolo wants to continue with plans to exit the crisis, but these plans cannot simply consist of investing to reproduce the same errors without calling into question the current model.
Investments must therefore be used to revive the economy, to meet needs but also to put the economy on the path to sustainable development.
Only a major agreement mobilizing all economic, political and social forces around a more balanced and better shared development objective, a green investment plan, will be able to get us out of the economic, social, energy and environmental crises of this century.
Ecolo wants to invest in the future and to this end advocates a recovery plan at European level equivalent to 2% of European GDP, half of which must be allocated to expenditure geared towards the ecological transition of the economy (investments in energy savings, in Research & Development, in worker training, in new rail and river infrastructures, etc.), the other half to employment.
Direct public aid, savings and private investments towards sustainable development and create a green sovereign fund
Employment aid is currently too little or not at all conditional on the actual creation of employment or its maintenance, while it represents a significant cost for public finances and social security.
Similarly, tax support for supplementary pensions (second pension pillar) and individual savings (third pension pillar) is too poorly conditional.
Ecolo therefore proposes to set criteria to direct these significant resources to serve the real economy, employment and sustainable development.
For this purpose, the EcoloGroen Group! submitted a bill "aimed at a sustainable orientation of the pension funds of the second and third pillars and the reserves of the aging fund".
This would involve combating their short-term investment policy and gradually directing their investments towards sustainable and equitable sectors.
Without additional financial cost, through a simple desire for regulation, such a policy could constitute an extraordinary support for an economy which is in dire need of stable, intelligent and positive investments.
The notional interest reform, as implemented by the liberal-socialist government, must be fundamentally revised.
It is very costly to the community, benefits large companies in particular, encourages tax dumping to the detriment of other States and is subject to excessive fraud, while it only supports employment or attracts sustainable and quality investments in very rare exceptions.
Ecolo demands that public aid be conditional on eliminating abuses and directing investment more selectively towards sectors and companies that create sustainable and quality employment, which really need it for the development of activity, particularly in innovative sectors and SMEs.
Finally, in order to direct household savings, Ecolo advocates the establishment of green government bonds and thus wishes to constitute the first green sovereign fund.
The State could thus organize the collection of household savings, use it for the ecological transition of the economy (starting with the insulation of public buildings, for example, which will generate savings, preserve the environment and create jobs), while ensuring a fair return to savers.
This formula will also be fairer than borrowing on international markets and thus paying interest abroad or to speculators.
Particularly support sectors of collective interest
The demand for public and non-profit collective services is strong and there are many unmet needs.
Ecolo wishes to continue to favor sectors which combine both economic development and well-being objectives.
In the same vein, Ecolo will continue to fight against the commercialization and commodification of non-market services and social security (notably health and pensions).
In the private sector, Ecolo wishes to support and promote the social economy aimed at developing profitable and sustainable economic activities without profit objectives, with employee participation in the social and economic objective of the company.
Finally, Ecolo intends to encourage the emergence of citizen initiatives and facilitate their financing.
For example, a minimum standard for socially and environmentally responsible financial investments should be set by law and encouraged through tailored tax measures.
Developing research on the path to sustainable development
Basic research, public and private Research & Development and innovation in businesses are a condition for the success of the transition.
Ecolo intends to direct and concentrate research as much as possible towards sustainable development in the broad sense23.
Putting economic policies at the service of humanity
Support and promote cooperation between countries and not competition
The green transition of the economy cannot be achieved in an economic and financial context where the quest for maximum profit reigns, whatever the social and environmental consequences.
After more than 20 years of deregulation and uncontrolled globalization, our economic model has created the conditions for the economic and financial crisis.
It has caused too much social damage, amplified environmental damage and contributed significantly to the depletion of natural resources.
It is competition between countries that is at the heart of most economic policies.
In Belgium, salaries are conditioned by the evolution of salaries in neighbouring countries, regardless of the creation of wealth in Belgium.
Similar mechanisms exist in other countries and make the competition as absurd as it is endless.
At the tax level, everyone is trying to put in place the best measure capable of attracting investors, even if it means causing the withdrawal of investments or relocations elsewhere.
Competitiveness as the sole principle of income distribution is no longer the way forward.
For Ecolo, only cooperation between countries can lead to sustainable and balanced development, for everyone, here and elsewhere, today and tomorrow.
Ecolo therefore advocates greater economic cooperation within and between the countries of the European Union, but also at the international level.
Only dialogue and cooperation can prevent us from experiencing the conditions for a new major social, economic and ecological crisis.
Setting social and environmental standards that govern global trade, with the aim of fair exchange
Global trade has been liberalized in the name of free trade, which sees social and environmental standards as an obstacle to free competition.
The question of social and environmental standards is inseparable from that of the place of human beings and rights, and the preservation of the biosphere in economic processes.
Belgium and the European Union must integrate compliance with binding social and environmental standards into their commercial, free trade and investment agreements.
Compliance with these standards should guide the global economy towards sustainable development and, among other things, enable the development of local trade, promote short supply chains and employment that cannot be relocated.
“Free trade” must be replaced by “fair trade.”
Social and environmental customs duties would only be levied on goods imported into Europe, in order to discourage offshoring and unfair competition;
The proceeds from these social rights would be returned in the form of development aid in order to accelerate the social, ecological and economic development of countries in the South.
23 See the “Research Innovation” chapter of Ecolo’s 2010 programmatic platform.
Expanding the ecological transition of the economy by also integrating developing countries
Saving the climate and putting the economy back at the service of people requires that the concerns of developing countries be truly taken into account.
Climate is a global issue.
Belgium and Europe must contribute to the sustainable development of all countries via, for example, a process of reinforced cooperation between them and emerging countries as well as poor countries threatened by climate change.
This involves, in particular, more substantial and better targeted financial aid, but also free transfers of knowledge and technology.
Aligning public policies towards the same objective of sustainable prosperity
Create a position of Deputy Prime Minister in charge of sustainable development so that the ecological transition of the economy is at the heart of all policies
To ensure the transition, we must equip ourselves with financial resources and public structures, and use these tools to drive policies that implement this political project in a cross-cutting manner.
It must be noted that beyond the usual clichés, the current ministers of finance, economy and employment have not changed their old habits in a decisive way and work in a too fragmented way.
Ecolo therefore wishes to extend and strengthen the skills of the minister responsible for sustainable development and make him a Deputy Prime Minister in charge of sustainable development.
This would be particularly responsible for ensuring that economic policies are geared towards the ecological transition of the economy, designed around the balanced articulation of economic, social and environmental issues.
A budget would be clearly allocated to this task, allowing the establishment of a Sustainable Development Inspection, and collaboration with other levels of power would be established.
The State, the best example of responsible consumption
In Belgium, the State is the biggest customer.
At European level, 5.5% of consumption is due to public authorities.
Public procurement must therefore be geared towards sustainable development, contain strict social and environmental clauses, and thus support sustainable goods and services and promote fair trade products.
Thus, through greener specifications, the State supports companies that are betting on the future.
A resolution was adopted to this effect at the initiative of Ecolo in December 2002 and transposed under the Arcenciel majority (1999 – 2003) in an article of the programme law of April 2003.
Public authorities can thus impose conditions which take into account social and ethical objectives.
Unfortunately, very few public authorities use this latitude.
We also propose the establishment, for all levels of government, of training aimed at improving the environmental, social and ethical performance of public procurement, with the aim of protecting workers and the planet, while fighting against all forms of dumping.
The State is also a major real estate owner.
The insulation of public and collective buildings (schools, hospitals, courthouses, prisons, etc.) must be a priority in order to reduce the energy bill of communities and greenhouse gas emissions.
It is also a way of creating jobs by paying local labour for insulation rather than paying for polluting fuels from distant countries.
To this end, Ecolo also wishes to bring together the various existing funds in the area of ​​support for energy savings to create a single fund allocated to this mission.
Supplementing traditional economic indicators with alternative indicators
Ecolo wants the Belgium boat to be equipped with new steering tools.
Since prosperity can no longer be limited to the sole objective of economic growth, public policies must also be guided by social and environmental imperatives.
In this matter as in others, the State must therefore set an example.
For Ecolo, Belgium and the European Union must equip themselves with alternative indicators taking into account the ecological and social footprint of any economic policy.
Supporting employment-environment alliances
Under the impetus of Ecolo, employment-environment alliances are developing in Brussels and Wallonia.
The first priority was given to the development of sustainable construction and renovation, but a series of other perspectives are open for future developments, notably in the areas of waste, water, sustainable food, sustainable tourism, private and public transport.
For Ecolo, the federal government must support these initiatives and encourage cooperation agreements between the country's regions in order to move forward together towards the transition.
Integrating consumers into the ecological transition
Supporting sustainable consumption
Ecolo wants the State to help the citizen consumer to make the right choices, with full knowledge of the facts.
It is necessary to ensure a better definition and an increase in production standards, in particular so that products last longer, without health or ecological risks.
In order to promote sustainable and responsible consumption, Ecolo offers:
to promote fair trade and eco-designed products;
to support and promote group purchasing and develop a special VAT tax status for initiatives taken in this direction, such as, for example, non-profit organisations aiming to group purchases by citizens who want to eat locally and healthily;
to reduce advertising pressure: a public debate on advertising must be conducted given its effects on young people, living together, health, etc., but also on the dissemination of certain stereotypes (particularly feminine ones);
to develop better labeling and a labeling policy that can better guide consumers.
Making green choices cheaper
New prosperity requires a reorientation of taxation.
We need to move towards a “true cost of pollution” and make ecological choices less expensive.
We must therefore encourage and support consumption that is compatible with our environment.
We must use taxation so that our economy, currently based on the use of polluting energy, can develop based on other energy sources or with less energy.
The “fair price” must obviously be accompanied by a strong social policy in order to protect low and middle income households.
This policy must also help to relocate certain productions, starting with food production, in particular in order to support quality and local agriculture.
Placing ecological transition at the heart of social dialogue
Building the transition with social partners
At the interprofessional level, Ecolo wishes to support social consultation and encourage the development of a transition strategy towards sustainable development with social partners.
Ecolo also invites sectors and companies with more than 50 workers to establish a list of indicators (energy, waste, wage pressure) likely to guide the decision and amplify the company's evolution towards sustainable development.
Furthermore, Ecolo hopes that the sustainability approach of companies will gradually become the focus of strategic considerations for business leaders.
Therefore, companies with more than 50 employees must be able to benefit from the support of an eco-advisor.
Finally, the law on well-being at work should be supplemented so that social consultation linked to well-being and the environment, as currently carried out in the Work Prevention and Protection Committees (CPPT), can continue to apply to the company premises, but is also extended to the role of the company in its external environment.
Training employees and anticipating the transition
Ecolo invites the social partners to negotiate together the implementation of a training system that allows each worker to train throughout their life and to anticipate the ecological transition of the economy, as proposed for example by the Swedish knowledgelift model.
The basic skills of low and medium-skilled workers would thus be targeted through intersectoral training, decentralised at the regional level.
To finance this vast training operation, Ecolo recommends doubling the percentage of the payroll allocated to training so-called at-risk groups (unemployed, low-skilled, etc.).
In this way, the sectors and regional public training operators will be able to build this vast training plan together.
Ecolo also wants to strengthen paid educational leave which gives employees access to training.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity Axis Regulation
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Regulation
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Since its creation, Ecolo has refused to believe that the free market can give birth naturally and without external regulation to a united society, respectful of the environment and generating numerous and quality jobs.
This is why, with others, Ecolo affirms the necessity and the possibility of another economic order built on initiative, participation, solidarity, equity, well-being and sustainable development for everyone, for a fair and dynamic economy.
The findings that we have been able to draw over the last two years from observing the crises caused by a globalized, financialized and liberalized world economy, whose main objective is to maximize the rate of profit whatever the consequences, support us in this analysis.
Never have the dead ends of the current system been so glaring: climate disruption, pollution of all kinds, exhaustion of natural resources, growing social divide in rich nations and total destitution in the least favored countries, international tensions, repeated financial crises of ever greater magnitude, requiring massive state intervention, the examples abound!
The philosophy of economic policy that Ecolo wants to promote therefore aims to move from a classic market economy, placing blind faith in traditional theories of wealth construction, aiming for growth for growth's sake, to a "project economy", projects that will help to meet the enormous social and environmental challenges that face us and which will place Belgium on the path to sustainable and more balanced development.
Our aim is to build a pragmatic and credible alternative to the current mode of growth and market dogmas.
In this perspective, we affirm that ecology is both a necessity and an opportunity for the economy.
Sustainable development is not a new constraint for businesses, but a vital necessity to avoid much higher economic, social and environmental costs tomorrow, and an extraordinary opportunity for business and employment.
Sustainable development is not a constraint for consumers but a source of savings that will improve their economic capacity and a source of well-being that will improve the state of our environment, our health and our quality of life.
The financial crisis that has hit the world economy and the global economic crisis that we have been experiencing for two years demonstrate, if proof were needed, that the State, whose role has been reduced for 20 years, has an essential responsibility to exercise as a market player, both stimulator and regulator.
For us, it is therefore a question of guiding and supervising the market rather than submitting to its dictates.
We therefore refuse that the economy be established above or in place of democratic power.
On the contrary, we believe that economic development, even in a globalized economy, must be included in the field of political debate because it is up to society as a whole to define and forge a destiny that is valid for all and to serve sustainable development and the well-being of society.
Ecolo's proposals
Regulate finance
The “self-regulated” financial system has failed.
It was not designed to be safe, but to allow financiers to make ever greater profits.
Responsibility is widely shared in the world of finance.
Bankers, rating agencies, supervisors, but also politicians, have all made mistakes.
To date, little or nothing has been done to prevent a new crisis from occurring.
Speculation on Greek sovereign debt and the frenzy to which it has led perfectly illustrates this observation of failure.
However, proactive measures will have to be adopted to prevent such a crisis from happening again.
Solutions to the crisis will therefore have to be radical, lasting and necessarily multiple.
For Ecolo, these solutions, to be debated immediately at the different levels of power, must be based on four simple principles:
better risk identification;
or a limitation of risk;
greater protection against risk;
better governance.
These solutions must be articulated between the European level and the Belgian level.
The current crisis clearly shows that enhanced cooperation between Member States is necessary.
However, the importance of solutions at European level cannot be used as a pretext for not taking measures which can be taken at national level.
More than ever, the principle of subsidiarity must be applied judiciously.
Furthermore, a parallel reflection must be initiated regarding the place and specific role of the State, which is now once again present in the capital of large traditional banks.
In particular, there is an urgent need to integrate societal and environmental objectives into the heart of banks' actions.
Ecolo has formulated 5 priority proposals to quickly implement this necessary regulation.
Separating banking professions
As a prerequisite for any lasting solution, it is necessary to reaffirm a fundamental principle, that of the strict separation of banking activities.
One of the responses to the 1929 crisis consisted, from the mid-1930s, in separating the banking professions24.
On one side, the traditional bank which collected savings and granted credits and on the other, the investment bank which invested these funds in more complex financial products.
Since the early 1990s, this boundary has blurred.
Traditional banks have launched into increasingly speculative activities, more decoupled from the real economy and ever more sophisticated.
It is essential to re-establish a clear boundary between these two types of actors.
To achieve this, traditional banks must be prohibited from lending funds to investment banks or from purchasing structured securities from these investment banks.
Traditional banks would therefore once again focus on their core business: collecting savings and granting loans to individuals and businesses.
Investment banks would therefore not be able to obtain deposits from individuals or banks under any circumstances.
Only traditional banks would be protected by state guarantees in the event of bankruptcy.
The possible bankruptcy of investment banks would no longer have any consequences
24 Draft law aimed at splitting banking activities, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/2455/52K2455001.pdf
direct on traditional banks.
Finally, traditional banks could no longer be listed on the stock exchange.
In future, the stock market must no longer impose excessive profitability requirements on banks and jeopardise the stability and security of savings.
Experience shows that unlisted banks are much less affected by the crisis (cf.
Rabobank and Triodos, for example).
Strengthening solvency counter-cyclically
The current crisis demonstrates amply that the race for profits leads to catastrophe.
Banks will have to accept the fact that they can no longer achieve a return on equity of 15% per year or more.
These huge profits and profitability were only possible thanks to excessive risk-taking and insufficient equity (excessive leverage).
The banking system is too important to be left to the financial sorcerer's apprentices alone.
It is therefore necessary to strengthen the solvency of banks, as has been successfully implemented in Canada and Spain.
We propose a dynamic equity system that would allow equity variability depending on the economic situation with an incompressible minimum.
In good economic times, banks' capital requirements would be gradually increased (up to 10% of liabilities)25, which would force them to build up reserves by taking part of their profits.
In a downturn, capital requirements would be relaxed (up to 6% of liabilities), leaving banks with room to absorb losses by drawing down on reserves set aside for this purpose.
Protecting the saver
Savers often get lost in the products offered by banks.
Some of them felt cheated when they discovered with shock that the financial products they had bought were not, in the end, as safe as their banker had told them.
The bankruptcy of Lehmann Brothers caused savers who invested responsibly to lose a lot of money, including in our country.
Some banks mislead consumers by writing overly complicated information brochures and inserting clauses that exempt them from any liability in the event of a problem.
Current legislation does not allow the Banking, Finance and Insurance Commission (CBFA) to judge the quality of financial products offered to Belgian savers.
The economic inspection is not competent for financial products.
In short, the financial products offered to Belgian savers do not have to meet any quality or security standards.
We hope that in the future, the Economic Inspectorate will be able to prohibit the sale of certain products if they are too risky or if they do not meet certain quality requirements, as is done for consumer goods.
Such a tool should protect savers against the abusive practices of certain banks.
Ecolo also believes that banks which sell their clients investments with guaranteed capital issued by third parties must act as guarantors of the capital when the third party guarantor of this capital does not respect its commitments.
Taxing speculative operations
There is an urgent need to introduce a tax on stock market transactions (not just currency speculation).
The aim here is to discourage, through taxation, speculative operations on securities and currencies and to encourage the long-term holding of financial securities (as a responsible father).
This would involve introducing a low rate tax (between 0.1% and 0.5%) on all financial transactions26.
25 Bill to strengthen banks' equity capital (submitted to the Chamber services).
This low rate would not be dissuasive for the investor or saver who wishes to invest in the long term in a company.
This maximum rate of 0.5% is nothing compared to the entry and/or exit fee of certain investment funds which can amount to 5% or to the fees charged by banks and brokers for the purchase of shares which can amount to 2% of the price of these shares.
On the other hand, it would be de facto very dissuasive for speculators who sell and buy securities several times in the same day.
Furthermore, the rate of the tax on stock market transactions could vary depending on market volatility.
In periods of high volatility, the rate could be increased to 2.5%, and in periods of very high volatility, to 5%.
Improving accounting standards
The accounting standards that apply to large banks (all listed companies) in our country are those that were developed by a private American organization, namely the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB).
Part of the regulatory function was therefore privatised under the pretext that this model would be more efficient.
However, the IASB was, and still is, blinded by its faith in the omniscience of the markets, despite the cries of Cassandra from certain bankers.
The IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards)27 rules are based on the principle that all balance sheet items must be valued at market value (mark-to-market).
However, market value is not always appropriate.
The consequences of the mark-to-market rules force banks to write down assets that they do not intend to sell and on which they will not suffer losses.
When assets appreciate, banks make profits and when they depreciate, they make losses.
Such an approach greatly increases the volatility of corporate results.
We advocate rules that are less sensitive to fluctuations in financial markets.
Other proposals
In addition to these 5 priority proposals, Ecolo is formulating other financial regulation measures, detailed in our Long Programme, such as:
create public and independent rating agencies;
obligate the holding of safe assets by financial institutions;
limit the securitization of receivables;
limit leverage;
prohibit short selling;
limit stock lending;
limit off-balance sheet transactions;
creation of a public interbank fund;
adjusting the role of the European Central Bank;
strengthen the deposit guarantee fund;
taxing financial flows with tax havens;
make remuneration transparent;
strengthen the independence of directors;
ban golden parachutes;
limit the remuneration of company directors;
tax stock options more.
26 This tax will be payable to the Belgian State in particular when the place of negotiation, the place of accounting registration, the place of settlement of the transaction, the domicile, a place of management, operation, administration or the establishment of a party or an intermediary to the transaction are located in Belgium. 27 International Financial Reporting Standards.
Protecting the consumer
Improving guarantees for consumer goods
Too often consumers do not receive the after-sales service they have a right to expect.
In the event of a fault in a household appliance or electronic device, long repair times, which can reach 6 to 9 months, are sometimes imposed on customers without any compensation.
In some cases, repair costs or administrative fees are charged to the customer.
Ecolo proposes to impose a maximum repair period of 2 months for consumer goods.
Beyond this period, reimbursement of the purchase price by the seller or importer should be mandatory.
Furthermore, during the warranty period, no costs may be charged to the customer for the repair (labor, parts, possible travel, administrative costs).
Enable collective legal action for consumers and consumer protection associations
Currently, it is very difficult for associations to have access to the courts to defend collective interests, particularly in matters of consumer protection.
Studies have shown that Belgium, along with Germany and Austria, is one of the three countries in the European Union where there are the most obstacles to the introduction of legal proceedings to defend collective interests.
The announcement of an unjustified increase in the price of electricity, the observation of illegal price increases in hospital insurance premiums or in the tariff plans of telephone operators or internet providers, the application of unjustified fees by banks, the failure to comply with guarantees on household appliances, etc. are all examples likely to motivate collective action by associations.
For many victims of these practices, it is not financially possible to initiate legal proceedings which are often lengthy and complex.
However, every citizen, consumer, patient or borrower must be able to assert their rights.
Class action litigation will facilitate access to justice and reduce its costs while introducing more discipline into certain dishonest business practices.
Limit tacit renewals of contracts
In many areas, the consumer enters into contracts with suppliers (insurance contract, newspaper subscription, subscription to a sports or fitness centre, natural gas and electricity supply contract, telephone subscription, etc.).
In this context, it sometimes happens that he is unknowingly bound by a tacit renewal clause.
Indeed, fixed-term contracts often contain, usually in small print, provisions which provide for an automatic extension of the contract for a new term when one party has not informed the other party, before the expiry of the initially agreed term, that it objects to what is called tacit renewal.
This sometimes traps less informed consumers.
For this reason, Ecolo proposes to mark out tacit renewals in the future.
Suppliers would be required to send a form, in paper or electronic format, to be returned by the consumer no later than three months before the expiry of the contract.
In the absence of a response from the consumer within the specified period, the contract would be automatically extended in order to avoid interruption of the service, but the consumer would then have the possibility of terminating it early without charge.
In the same vein, Ecolo proposes to standardize and simplify the rules for terminating contracts, with a view to better protecting consumers and strengthening competition.
Supervising the practice of joint offering
Until the new law on market practices and consumer protection which reformed the law of July 14, 1991, the practice of joint offering was prohibited.
Following a ruling handed down on 23 April 2009 by the European Court of Justice which deemed this ban to be contrary to a European directive, the new law now authorises joint offers but provides for exceptions to this general principle (for example when it involves financial services).
Increased controls by the Economic Inspectorate will be essential to prevent, for example, a consumer lured by the offer of a mobile phone at a virtually zero price from being the victim of exorbitant telephone bills in relation to his real needs, the actual use of his mobile phone and market prices.
Better regulation of commercial advertising
The primary objective of commercial advertising is to sell and encourage the consumption of products and services.
It is most often found, almost by nature, at the antipodes of the dissemination of objective information which should guide citizens' choices in their consumption.
It can also generate attitudes and behaviors that are generally contrary to the need to reduce our ecological footprint.
In addition, commercial advertising is becoming more and more invasive overall, both in public spaces and beyond.
The trend must be reversed.
Structurally, Ecolo wishes to develop the Advertising Ethics Jury, composed voluntarily by representatives of advertisers, into an independent Observatory of commercial advertising, which would work in close collaboration with a public regulatory body.
This could suspend any advertising campaign that contravenes the guidelines proposed below or on the basis of consumer complaints.
In addition to general regulation (public displays, traditional media, etc.), these bodies should pay particular attention to new forms of advertising (Internet, mass distribution of e-mails, etc.), to the protection of life and private spaces (telephone and mailbox advertising, addressed mailings, etc.) and to the quality of the displays relating to the environmental performance and ethical characteristics of the products sold.
Furthermore, Ecolo offers:
to legislate on the conditions for the use of advertising terms such as “environmentally friendly, ecological, green, sustainable…” in order to combat greenwashing, a practice which consists of abusively presenting as favorable to the environment or health, products which are not;
to extend the list of products that cannot be advertised to products with a proven negative impact on the environment and health, based on objective criteria (presence of substances classified as toxic or dangerous, low energy efficiency, high CO2 emissions, contradiction with government programs such as energy management plans, air quality improvement policies, federal plan to reduce the use of pesticides, alcohol or tobacco);
to prohibit advertising aimed at children under 12 years of age, as well as the use of the image of children as purchasing prescribers;
to implement, under the authority of the regulatory body, a database of persons who wish not to receive addressed mailings or to be the subject of telephone or electronic canvassing;
to systematize this opportunity for all commercial enterprises and to sanction any violations;
to prohibit advertising that conveys stereotypes that could lead to discriminatory behavior: misogyny, racism, homophobia, xenophobia;
to prohibit advertising that promotes foreign service providers who are cheaper simply because they circumvent social law and the standards provided for in collective labor agreements (social and wage dumping);
to expand the areas of prohibition and restriction of advertising in public spaces in order to better protect our living environment.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity Axis Employment Activities Time
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Jobs – Activities Time
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
For several years, with an acceleration following the economic crisis, the unemployment rate has fluctuated around 15% in Wallonia and 20% in Brussels.
In Flanders it stands at just under 8%.
Nationwide, just over 700,000 people are excluded from the job market.
These include unemployed people receiving benefits, young people on a “waiting period”, job seekers sanctioned by the ONEm, early retirees, etc.
Added to this sad observation is the fact that the quality of jobs is deteriorating.
Contracts are increasingly precarious and flexible.
Part-time work, for example, has seen a meteoric rise;
Today it represents almost 30% of total employment.
However, we know that this type of work affects more women (it concerns 42% of female workers compared to 11% of male workers) and is often forced.
Similarly, the use of fixed-term contracts (12% of contracts) or temporary contracts (more than 90,000 people work under this status every day) is increasingly frequent.
In addition, for many workers, stress continues to increase.
Understaffing, pressure to be productive, competition with colleagues, performance-related pay, overtime, threats of dismissal, poor safety or environment in the workplace or the requirement to be available at all hours... have consequences on the well-being, private life and health of workers on the one hand, and on the general working climate on the other.
At the same time, work no longer gives an automatic right to sufficient income to live with dignity and meet the basic needs of households (thus, 5% of workers today live below the poverty line).
On the contrary, income inequalities are increasing and non-solidarity forms of remuneration are developing.
In short, employment and income are poorly distributed... sometimes to the detriment of young people, seniors or women, sometimes to the detriment of the least qualified and the most vulnerable.
Federal employment policies implemented in recent years have often only aggravated the distress of job seekers and the precariousness of workers:
activation plan which penalises and excludes the unemployed, insufficient training policies, weakened social dialogue and increasingly difficult dialogue between social partners, significant federal budget allocated to employment under “service voucher” contracts which are too precarious, policies almost exclusively focused on the cost of labour and employment assistance which excludes certain categories of people...
Ecolo cannot accept these "resigned" policies, which accommodate such a high unemployment rate, which accompany job losses rather than combating them and which undermine the quality of employment and income.
For Ecolo, a society of full employment remains the ideal to pursue.
Ecolo proposes job creation policies that meet the needs of citizens and the challenges of our time, such as climate change, the energy crisis, the aging of the population, etc. Ecolo also promotes truly “decent” jobs that respect the people who occupy them.
Ecolo wants to implement solidarity policies that allow citizens to find their place in our society, policies that therefore also integrate the redistribution of work and quality of life.
Ecolo's proposals
Supporting employment in sectors with environmental and social added value
Promote the ecological transition, the non-profit sectors and the social economy… and create sustainable and quality jobs
Ecolo wishes to lead our country towards new prosperity, by developing policies which respond to the multiple ecological challenges and which integrate the needs of the population.
To this end, Ecolo intends to:
develop employment-environment alliances by amplifying, via federal economic and employment policies, the efforts initiated at the level of the Walloon and Brussels Regions28;
Ecolo is resolutely oriented towards the future, towards shared prosperity where everyone must be able to find their place on the job market;
promoting the ecological transition means ensuring that, in the long term, each of the jobs and skills used in it also contribute to the well-being of the individual (suitable employment) and to the reduction of social and environmental costs (health, soil and air quality, etc.);
oinvest in collective services and strengthen employment in the non-profit sector;
health, culture, early childhood care, support for the elderly and disabled, socio-professional integration, etc. deserve in this regard a major reflection, both on their development, on the complementarity between public action and associative action and on the quality of the jobs that they generate;
they are indeed creators of wealth and collective well-being;
develop the social economy, a sector which brings significant social, cultural and environmental added value, and which constitutes a significant source of jobs;
The social economy is indeed a credible, non-relocatable and worker-friendly response at a time when the race for profits by too many economic players leads at best to putting ever more pressure on workers, and at worst to permanently excluding them from the job market.
Facilitating access to employment and training for disadvantaged populations
For support for job seekers that does not result in social exclusion
The so-called "unemployment support plan" is in fact an extraordinary mechanism for excluding the unemployed and today produces an impressive number of sanctions (more than 60,000 in 2009), too often arbitrary or even surreal, which affect the most deprived more and impoverish them even further.
This plan, which is also very ineffective in terms of job creation, weighs heavily on federal finances (called upon to finance the work of ONEm controllers), regional finances (which sometimes work to "agitate" job seekers through "carousel" workshops and training) and municipal finances (support by CPAS of sanctioned persons).
Since 2004, Ecolo has continued to denounce this "hunt for the unemployed", which is all the more absurd and unjust as there are not enough jobs compared to the growing number of those looking for them.
For Ecolo, there can only be a sanction if the job seeker first refuses a suitable job.
28 For more information, see the “Green Economy” chapter of the 2010 programmatic platform.
Ecolo proposes:
to redirect resources mobilized directly or indirectly by this federal activation plan towards regional policies, for appropriate support for job seekers, respectful of their professional project, which is part of a climate of trust and a constructive approach;
to strengthen the means for the development of training for job seekers, considering this first as a right and a means of learning, and not as a new social obligation.
Facilitate access to quality employment for all
Certain categories of the population have more difficulty accessing employment.
So it is the case for the less qualified, the younger, the older, women (at least for full-time employment), people of foreign origin...
Ecolo intends to:
combat employment traps and avoid cut-off or threshold effects to increase the difference between salary and replacement income, and therefore to make employment attractive29;
target reductions in social security contributions on low wages, by increasing and concentrating the “employment bonus” to facilitate access to employment for disadvantaged populations;
promote the development of the so-called “IOD” method (Intervention on Supply and Demand) to facilitate access to employment for people in precarious situations;
considering that each job seeker has a minimum of know-how and skills that can be valorized,
The idea is to work with employers to facilitate the hiring of people solely on their ability to meet the specifications inherent to the assigned task rather than on the basis of a traditional CV.
Furthermore, Ecolo believes that, in general, diversity in the company must be increased and that the fight against discrimination in hiring and/or during the career suffered by women, older workers, disabled people, people of foreign origin, workers with religious and philosophical beliefs or minority sexual orientations, must be combated.
Strengthening training for job seekers and workers
Education and training are essential for all adults, young or old, job seekers or workers.
They are part of the same logic: increasing people's resources to control their destiny and participate as actors in the future of society.
For Ecolo, the priority is to use public resources to train people in precarious situations, who are unemployed, who have precarious employment or who are vulnerable in their employment.
Very often, these people were not able to benefit fully and completely from the public resources invested in education and training policies for a well-structured education.
That being said, Ecolo believes that public authorities should not assume these training needs alone.
Ecolo therefore insists on professional sectors not only respecting as quickly as possible the commitments made by social partners within the framework of interprofessional agreements,
namely dedicating 1.9% of the payroll to continuing training for workers,
but also to eventually exceed this objective to gradually raise it to 2.5%, and to finance, among other things, training for less qualified workers, tutoring and mentoring measures, as well as the redeployment of paid educational leave.
29 Ecolo also calls for an increase in the minimum wage, to allow workers to live decently. See the chapter “Social security and the fight against poverty” of the 2010 programmatic platform.
Ecolo is indeed attached to the principle of the individual right of the worker to training and to the system of paid educational leave;
Ecolo wants to allow access to all workers in the private sector (including part-time workers, workers in SMEs, etc.)
and increase the ceiling of hours to which workers are entitled to restore it to the situation prior to the decision of the outgoing Government to reduce it to a minimum.
Ecolo also proposes to develop training in green sectors and professions with “recruitment difficulties” (so-called “shortage” professions), to face the challenges of today and tomorrow.
Improving the quality of employment and working conditions
Making public aid conditional on job creation
In our country, public aid, tax aid or reductions in social security contributions, are significant.
Thus, in 2008, more than 3,500,000 jobs benefited from reductions in contributions, which represents an annual budget of almost €6 billion.
Similarly, among the tax aid granted, notional interests cost almost €4 billion in 2009.
For Ecolo, this public aid cannot be granted without compensation.
They must be a lever for sustainable investment and employment.
However, too often at the moment, some of this aid constitutes windfall effects and threatens social security revenues.
Notional interests, for example, mainly benefit multinationals or large companies, capable of mobilising significant capital, without offering substantial advantages to players in the real economy, SMEs, VSEs or companies that invest in research and development or in the training of their workers.
Ecolo intends to make this public aid conditional on the real creation of jobs.
Furthermore, Ecolo also proposes that certain targeted public aids allow companies to engage in sustainable development and ecological transition.
Strengthening the definition of suitable employment
Today, job seekers who do not accept or apply for suitable employment are penalized.
Workers who leave a decent job too.
However, a suitable job can be, according to the law, an involuntary part-time job, a job that does not correspond to the studies carried out by the person (from the 7th month of unemployment), a job that requires a home-work commute of 4 hours per day, a job with weekend benefits and variable hours, a very short-term job, or even a job for which the employer does not respect the legal provisions (they must persist in not respecting them for a worker to be able to leave this job).
In short, a decent job today is not necessarily a quality job, namely a job that allows you to live with dignity and plan for the future!
Ecolo believes that it is urgent:
to revisit the definition of suitable employment to include the criterion of maintaining the choice of profession and career choice, to improve the remuneration and working conditions of workers and to assert the right to family life;
This revision would make it possible to improve the quality of employment for all and protect job seekers against certain abusive sanctions;
to review the “service vouchers” system, to ensure correct status, working conditions and remuneration for the workers concerned;
the subsidies received by service voucher operators must take into account the quality of the job offered and the seniority of the workers, which is not the case today and disadvantages the most serious employers who are most concerned about the quality of employment of workers in the sector;
to improve health and safety at work, both to better prevent accidents at work and to better deal with problems related to the workplace such as harassment, recognition and prevention of occupational diseases, stress, etc.
Fight against precarious and flexible contracts
Precarious, part-time, temporary or fixed-term contracts generate unstable, variable and often insufficient income, a demand for flexible working hours that is often incompatible with quality of life, in short, insecurity and unpredictability.
Ecolo proposes:
to improve the quality of employment contracts, to combat worker precariousness;
For example, Ecolo intends to ensure that part-time workers can know their schedule further in advance, have priority to increase their working hours when opportunities for employment arise in their company, and can in fact be entitled to an extension of fixed hours in the event of an amendment (for overtime work) to successive contracts;
to strengthen the guaranteed income allowance (salary supplement paid) for people who work part-time involuntarily;
to combat the generalisation of part-time or seasonal contracts;
solutions exist, such as “employer groups”, associations which bring together employers with the aim of recruiting one or more employees made available to its members according to the needs of each;
employer groups are part of a new relationship with work where the demands of several companies are pooled;
everyone is happy there;
companies that can occasionally use labour, with hours adapted to their specific needs (production peaks, compensatory hiring, etc.), which reduce the costs associated with hiring and retain their staff (more experienced and therefore more efficient), and employees who can hope to benefit from a full-time contract of indefinite duration, a contract signed with a more solid contact, which offers greater job security;
Ecolo therefore proposes to develop employer groups, in particular by consolidating current experiences, by promoting the approach to social partners and by broadening the opportunities offered by legislation.
Harmonize statuses, by improving that of workers
The distinction between worker status and employee status no longer has much reason to exist.
It creates a dualisation in the labour market and causes unacceptable discrimination.
In the context of the social and economic crisis, Ecolo believes that it is now more necessary than ever to harmonize these statuses in order to strengthen the protection of workers against dismissal.
Beyond the issue of notice, it is more generally appropriate to reach a global agreement concerning the other differences: temporary unemployment, waiting day, payment of salaries, holiday pay, guaranteed salaries in the event of incapacity for work and trial period.
Ecolo will support social dialogue and intends that the federal government can provide support to social partners, if this is useful.
Redistribute working time
Today, some people work a lot or too much, others not enough or not at all.
In Belgium, the actual working time is on average 31 hours/week.
It has never been so low, a situation which can be explained by a very unequal distribution of working time, with the weight of part-time work representing more than a quarter of overall employment30.
Unemployment and the number of involuntary part-time workers are on the rise.
The number of overtime hours worked also...
30 Since 1970, average working hours have been reduced by around 7 hours/week. However, the decline in average working hours stopped in the early 1990s. Since then, it has been noted that the productivity gains which have been accumulating are no longer being transformed into a reduction in working hours.
Furthermore, the change in work rhythms, the intensification of work and the increased fragmentation of working hours lead to an increasing desynchronization of social times.
And, again, the inequalities are glaring!
It is the low-skilled, women and young people who are proportionally more confronted with irregular hours and imposed hours (no possibility of participating in determining their working hours, impossibility or great difficulty in getting time off in the event of an emergency, etc.).
It should also be noted that unemployment affects more young people and the elderly (in Wallonia, for example, one in five job seekers is under 25 and one in five job seekers is over 50) and part-time work affects more women (almost one in two women is employed part-time).
Faced with the difficult task of reconciling family and professional life, women are more likely to accept part-time jobs... and therefore also to give up a career, a certain security and professional independence.
It should also be noted that the proportion of income of shareholders and property owners has increased by 10% in the gross domestic product over the last twenty years, to the detriment of salaried and self-employed workers, but also of collective services and social security.
For Ecolo, questions of working time are also global and collective questions, which must be treated as such.
Ecolo therefore believes that current measures in this area are largely insufficient.
Although various so-called "crisis" measures have existed since 2009, such as temporary unemployment for economic reasons, collective reduction in working hours, crisis time credit and crisis unemployment, these measures do not concern all companies and workers, but only companies "lacking work" and the workers employed there.
Similarly, although voluntary part-time measures have existed for several years, which are also well-received, such as time credit, career breaks and part-time early retirement, these are essentially matters of individual freedom.
Ecolo wishes to be part of the objective of a better redistribution of working time.
The collective reduction of working time can be an exciting prospect for a transition to a more sustainable economy, for the environment, for citizens, for the well-being of each individual and for the prosperity of our society.
New ways of organizing work and taxation must be made possible to enable more people to work, thereby allowing for a better distribution of income and a better quality of life for everyone.
Ecolo wishes to encourage forms of collective reduction in working hours to enable compensatory hiring.
Ecolo therefore invites the social partners to put this question on the agenda and to make it a central theme of the next interprofessional negotiations.
The federal authorities will have to take steps to encourage the development of such agreements, in particular through accompanying measures to preserve income.
Developing innovative time policies
Generalize the Tandem plan and tutoring
Ecolo proposes to generalize the Tandem plan and to gradually hire more young people.
Ecolo is proposing that the Tandem plan be developed across all non-profit sectors and pushed towards the commercial sector.
The Tandem plan allows:
or for the older worker to reduce their benefits to half-time while retaining approximately 85% of their remuneration;
automatic compensatory hiring of a young person, at least part-time (and full-time as soon as hours are freed up);
paid tutoring periods allowing the exchange of knowledge.
Create a civic service to enable young people to discover the professional, social and cultural world, etc. and to possibly replace the waiting period
The situation of many young people today is very difficult:
social and family breakdowns, leaving school without a diploma or qualification, high poverty rate, unemployment rate higher than other age categories, 9-month waiting period without benefits, increasingly difficult integration into suitable employment and sustainable employment, inconclusive results of support and activation, hiring plans focused on reducing labor costs, etc.
Almost all the initiatives taken are focused on professional integration...
without taking into account a broader, more civic participation in society as defined, for example, in the Declaration of Community Policy in the French Community31.
Ecolo wishes to open up other perspectives by creating a civic service, to allow young people who wish to do so to discover the professional, social, cultural world, etc. while fulfilling public utility missions with approved organizations.
Upon completing their studies, each young person between the ages of 18 and 25 who wishes to do so would benefit from a paid contract of 6 to 12 months (real employment contract, with social rights), validated at the end of the course by a certificate of professional skills.
This civic service would be the subject of a clear contract regarding the missions to be fulfilled and would be carried out, according to the choice of the young people, with a public service or a service in the non-profit sector (primarily in their district), civil protection, an NGO, etc.
Aiming for social integration, alongside professional integration
The interest in social integration or participation does not only concern young people.
All adults, particularly the least qualified or the most vulnerable, need their commitment to their loved ones or within society to be supported and recognised.
Ecolo therefore considers it necessary to encourage and support certain social activities as "relays" for training activities or periods of employment, and to gradually recognise those which meet a need.
The feeling of uselessness or the break after periods of activity (training, employment) eats away at people's minds and plunges them into dark periods.
On the other hand, social integration (example: building a social project with other partners, combining both social activities and cooperative mutual aid) provides social support and better well-being, and in particular results in a proactive attitude towards life in general and employment opportunities in particular.
To achieve this objective, Ecolo therefore hopes that socio-professional integration will no longer be limited to finding employment in the "traditional" job market, but will also be considered through social activities, in suitable structures.
Introduce a new mechanism for voluntary reduction of working time
Ecolo proposes to introduce, for workers who wish to do so, a mechanism for voluntary reduction of working hours, by opening up the possibility of exchanging the equivalent salary (13th month, double holiday pay, seniority, revaluation, etc.) for additional days of leave.
The saved payroll would then be reinvested in compensatory commitments.
31 “Educated, well-integrated, generous, critical, emancipated, curious citizens, with a sense of effort and solidarity, with a collective sense and the ambition to participate in the development of their society”.
Facilitate and support professional transition times
Ecolo also proposes to facilitate and support times of professional transition and training, so that all workers can benefit from “transition” periods during which they would be exempt from going to work to prepare and manage their life and professional choices.
To place these innovative time policies in a broader framework
According to Ecolo, all these "innovative" time policies will have to be discussed and then negotiated with the social partners.
They are part of a broader framework, within which the strengthening of family time (maternity and paternity leave, adoption leave, parental leave, community leave), childcare and support for the elderly constitute priorities.
Ecolo electoral platform
Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Employment and Solidarity Axis
Independent SMEs
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Independent SMEs
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Independent businesses are above all human adventures, managed by entrepreneurs and investors who know their social, economic and cultural environment and who are, or could be, part of a sustainable development project dynamic with the driving forces of their regions.
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which employ a significant proportion of workers (40% in 2009) and are often at the forefront of innovation, constitute one of the essential drivers of economic development.
Thus, if the situation of the self-employed and bosses of SMEs and VSEs32 has long been neglected, some people now agree on the importance of supporting initiative, creativity and a taste for risk.
That being said, between saying and doing, there is a real cultural revolution to be made.
However, the challenges are considerable.
Thus, we must observe a great inequality of income among the self-employed: 40% of declared income is held by 80% of them;
a third of the self-employed would generate an income below the poverty threshold.
It is also worth noting that there is a weaker entrepreneurial culture here than elsewhere, particularly due to the risk of bankruptcy, the uncertainty of income, the lack of financial support for business creation and the administrative difficulties associated with it.
The role of political power is, beyond the "dynamic" discourse of circumstance, to put in place the conditions so that the risk does not turn into a nightmare,
in particular through adequate social protection,
and to ensure that the most suitable tools (creation, transfer, transmission of activities) are available to the self-employed and SMEs.
Ecolo therefore proposes to provide social protection for the self-employed
and support for the initiative,
notably via a development pact for SMEs, the next major federal priorities.
Ecolo's proposals
Developing social protection for the self-employed
Improving social protection for low-income self-employed people
Ecolo is concerned about the social situation of the self-employed, nearly a third of whom have a particularly low standard of living.
32 TPE: Very Small Enterprises.
In this regard, Ecolo proposes a series of measures:
raise all minimum social benefits to the poverty line;
extend to three years the possible benefit of the “bankruptcy” fund;
the allowance paid after one year would be equal to that provided by unemployment insurance;
grant automatic entitlement to unemployment insurance for self-employed persons who have started their activity before or during their waiting period, the waiting period taking into account the period of activity;
grant the right to unemployment benefit to all self-employed persons, regardless of their length of activity, on the basis of the usual conditions giving entitlement to unemployment;
raise to the poverty threshold the threshold from which exemption from paying social security contributions is possible on the grounds that the self-employed person is in a “state of need”;
raise, to the level of the interprofessional minimum wage (net), the income giving the right to a reduction in contributions;
ocreate a support service for the self-employed responsible for their individual monitoring, so that in the event of exemption, exemption or reduction of contributions, there is a joint analysis, support, referral to appropriate services, information on existing assistance,
the planned aid would thus be valid for three years, extendable once, for a period of one year;
in the event of business failure, this service would provide support at the end of the business and access to the bankruptcy fund33;
definitively order the current crisis measure allowing the deferral of contribution payments, in order to allow the postponement of the due date in the event of a cash flow problem.
These new rights must obviously be accompanied by a new organization of social contributions.
For example, by raising the ceilings, with a special contribution on income above the ceilings.
This measure could concern all self-employed persons and requires increased solidarity, making it possible to ensure greater fairness between self-employed persons and between self-employed persons and employees in the participation in the financing of social security.
At the same time, alternative financing of social security must be continued and expanded, as well as the fight against social and tax fraud.
Increase the lowest pensions
In the long term, the minimum pension for the self-employed should match that of employees.
To achieve this, Ecolo first wants to increase the lowest pensions and establish a minimum entitlement per year of career.
This minimum would result in allowing self-employed people who have not completed two thirds of a full career, and therefore are not entitled to a minimum pension, to obtain a revalued pension.
As for the penalty in the event of early retirement currently applied, Ecolo will ensure that this penalty which creates an unjustified difference is eliminated.
Improving the social status of self-employed women
In addition to the desire to increase the family allowance for the first child to the level of employees,
Ecolo proposes that self-employed women benefit from 10 weeks of maternity leave (currently 8), with the possibility of hiring a replacement or helper while having the right to monitor the management of their activity.
Similarly, certain professions would deserve to benefit from compensation or temporary replacements due to being sidelined in the event of toxicity or arduousness of certain work.
In order to promote female entrepreneurship, it is necessary to consider the specificities of women, especially in light of the increase in the number of single-parent families.
Childcare must be adapted, for example by ensuring that daycare centres have opening hours that correspond to those of shops on weekdays.
33 This service could also be useful for self-employed people at the end of their careers and whose business is declining. It could generally be inspired by what exists for artists who request independent status. The economic viability of their professional project is examined by an INASTIINAMI cell. The aim here is to assess the extent to which the activity still allows this independent worker to earn a living.
Support for the establishment of networks between female entrepreneurs is also a priority, knowing that they often work alone and that existing circles are often closed to women.
It is therefore necessary to allow female entrepreneurs to organize themselves in a complementary and supportive manner.
Improving disability benefits
Any major health problem is generally followed, among the self-employed, by a reduction or even a cessation of current activity.
In addition to the costs associated with the illness, there is a loss of profits and primary revenues associated with the activity.
Sometimes the treasury cannot cope with this situation.
It is therefore necessary to increase disability income so that at the very least the self-employed person who has stopped working can meet their needs adequately.
It is also necessary to activate the status of independent replacement worker to compensate for long-term absences34 and allow a partial resumption of activity while continuing to benefit, in part, from the incapacity allowance.
Base the calculation and payment of social security contributions on the income of the current year
Ecolo proposes that social security contributions for the self-employed be paid on the basis of quarterly (or annual) income and profits for the current year (and no longer on income and profits dating back 3 years), with a system of advance payments and a correction of contributions to be paid after tax registration, in a manner similar to income tax payments.
In fact, except at the start of their career, a self-employed person pays social security contributions based on their income and profits made 3 years previously.
If his situation improves, he benefits from it.
But if during more difficult years his situation deteriorates or if he reduces his working hours, he will be penalized from then on by having to pay significant contributions for reduced income and profits.
This situation is not only penalizing, but also unfair and regularly leads to bankruptcies.
Support the initiative
Adopt an intergovernmental pact to support the initiative
Since many levels of power intervene in independent activities, particularly for various administrative procedures, Ecolo proposes to bring them around the table.
Although progress has already been made in terms of the creation of business counters or a single business number, for example, an assessment of the impact of a series of legislative and regulatory measures developed by the different levels of government still needs to be carried out.
This pact would aim in particular to:
simplify administrative procedures and economic aid systems with particular attention to very small businesses (VSEs), in particular so as not to repeatedly request information already available to the public authorities;
speed up the processing time for files and payment of aid;
to objectify the criteria for granting aid;
ease the constraints for those who want to start an independent activity, particularly for job seekers;
to inform, in a systematic and coordinated manner, the self-employed about their rights and duties;
oetc.
Developing start-up assistance
Private banks tend to avoid risk-taking and therefore do not finance the launch of activities, even if they do not require significant investments.
The public authorities have therefore put in place additional loan tools.
There are also organizations specializing in microcredit, which must be supported and better promoted.
Ecolo wants to encourage organizations offering financial assistance opportunities for starting activities, in order to support the initiative.
Furthermore, Ecolo proposes maintaining unemployment benefit (or replacement income) during the first year of operation for the new self-employed person.
Finally, Ecolo wants to develop business incubators and management support organizations (in particular by launching “management support” checks).
Thoroughly review the notional interest system
It is mainly very large companies that benefit most from this reduction in corporate tax.
As currently in force, the system in any event contributes to international tax dumping.
Ecolo proposes to fundamentally review this system to impose conditions in order to:
to channel this aid into job creation or business development;
provide further support for innovative sectors;
introduce selectivity for those who really need it (very small businesses).
These changes will help achieve the initial objectives of this measure and benefit small and medium-sized businesses more and better.
At the same time, budgetary margins useful for solidarity and sustainable development policies can thus be found.
Promoting cooperation between small businesses
Several measures would help create more cooperation between the self-employed and small businesses.
Employer groups, self-employment support structures (SAACE) and business incubators can contribute to this.
Ecolo intends in particular to develop employer groups by removing current legal obstacles (the current law only allows the hiring of job seekers who are difficult to place) in order to improve the quality of employment by allowing entrepreneurs to hire one or more employees together and make them available to each other, according to the variation in the activity cycles of the different employers.
Reduce VAT to 6% in eco-construction and eco-renovation
Construction is a key sector in terms of economic development and the fight against climate change, given the enormous potential for energy savings in the real estate sector (low-energy and passive houses, etc.).
In order to guide the sector in this sustainable direction, Ecolo proposes to reduce VAT to 6% for the construction and renovation of homes that apply certain standards in terms of insulation, energy saving, use of renewable energies, etc.
Reduction of social security contributions for the hiring of the first two workers
Self-employed people and small businesses sometimes want to hire an additional person but cannot do so given the proportionally high cost that this represents.
Ecolo proposes to facilitate the first two commitments by applying reductions in social security contributions for three years.
Respect payment deadlines to suppliers
The amount of invoices paid late by the federal government to self-employed people and businesses is often too high.
These payment delays cause difficulties for small and very small businesses which regularly encounter cash flow problems.
For Ecolo, payment deadlines must be scrupulously respected and monitoring must be implemented in this regard.
Respect the quality of life of the self-employed and the development of healthy competition in the context of commercial activities
Ecolo defends the maintenance of the limits imposed on the opening hours of department stores knowing that these already cover very wide time slots.
Further liberalisation of these opening hours would imply authorising working conditions that unreasonably interfere with workers' family lives and would increase the risk of bankruptcies for small independent businesses.
Ecolo also supports the limitations imposed on sales and pre-sales periods.
Without these restrictions, the large chains would engage in anarchic sales, one of the perverse effects of which would be to cause the bankruptcy of small neighbouring businesses.
In addition, the diversity of products, their quality as well as the places where local and regional products are sold at fair prices could be jeopardized.
It is with the same perspective that Ecolo intends, at the regional level, to supervise the development of commercial establishments, based on a territorial vision of development which centrally takes into account sustainability criteria, but also makes it possible to ensure the net creation of jobs and not the displacement of jobs.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity AxisResearch Innovation
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Research Innovation
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Investment in knowledge and innovation is one of the major keys to the sustainable development of our societies.
A vector of progress and understanding of the developments in our societies, a source of improvement in the quality of life and an essential driver of economic activity, scientific research constitutes a fundamental response to the social, economic, cultural, energy, health and environmental challenges of the 21st century.
In this regard, public authorities have an important role to play through the development and financing of research and innovation which responds not only to economic concerns but also and above all to the demands of societal progress in social and environmental matters.
Fundamental research, free from any pressure to focus only on sectors with industrial applications or high economic potential, and focused on the long term, is indeed vital for the progress and development of our societies.
In Belgium, research-related skills are shared between the federal state and the federated entities, which have the majority of levers in this area:
programming policy for fundamental or applied research, funding, status of researchers and research staff35.
The federal government, for its part, has specific skills linked to the orientation of research as support for political decision-making and the management of federal scientific establishments.
Ecolo's proposals
Investing in research and directing it towards sustainable development
The crisis reminds us how important it is to invest in the future.
Research, particularly in sustainable sectors, can create well-being in our society and contribute to environmental protection and innovation.
The challenges are numerous;
The fight against climate change, as well as peak oil and the search for alternatives to fossil fuels are part of this.
To respond to this, Ecolo is proposing to implement a vast green recovery plan on a European scale amounting to 2% of GDP, a portion of which should be allocated to investments in research.
35 For more information on this, see Ecolo’s 2009 programme, Book IV, Chapter 5, “Research and Innovation”.
At the same time, Ecolo reaffirms the importance of reaching the objective of 3% of GDP to be allocated to research and development (of which 1% must come from the public sector).
It is imperative to increase public aid for research, at all levels of government, by at least 0.5% of GDP.
The Green Deal proposed by Ecolo should make it possible to achieve this.
To implement these investments, Ecolo is proposing in particular the launch by the Federal Government of a multi-year programme of fundamental research into green energies that can be used in Belgium, integrating in particular the technical, societal, systemic and environmental dimensions.
This program should provide answers to energy and climate challenges and also open the way to great economic opportunities.
Ecolo also proposes that investment in research should therefore give priority to innovative sectors, particularly the sectors of the new green economy.
It is also a question of ensuring better coordination of investments made at different levels of power, particularly in terms of defining priorities and through co-financing with the private sector, while going beyond purely economic and academic criteria.
It is also appropriate to support a measure of tax deductibility for costs incurred by companies in R&D36.
In this regard, it will be useful to set up a permanent mechanism for monitoring investments in the research sector as well as tools for the qualitative evaluation of research and innovation.
Ecolo finally wishes to coordinate the various existing research centers and promote interdisciplinary research.
Improving the status of researchers
For a long time, the status and careers of researchers have been a matter of concern.
The findings are widely known regarding the precariousness of their status and the shared intentions regarding its improvement, in order to avoid a brain drain and to optimize their work.
However, while significant thought has been given, the legislative framework to significantly improve the status of research is still lacking today.
The problems linked to the status are multiple: lack of stability, precariousness of contracts (even more so for aspirants) and careers, problem of portability of social rights.
Ecolo therefore reaffirms its desire to improve the status of researchers.
Among a series of necessary measures, not all are within federal competence.
The federal government can, in particular, influence the tax deduction policy and ensure that it actually benefits researchers and research.
Furthermore, Ecolo wants coordination between all levels of power in order to pursue a coherent policy on financial incentives for research.
Maintaining and developing federal scientific potential
Research and scientific expertise are developing at different levels.
Ecolo intends to maintain the federal scientific potential, which exists in the various federal public services as well as in the SPP Scientific Policy.
The latter, commonly called Belspo, participates in the development of quality research serving the entire population and the different levels of power (national research programs).
36 Research & Development.
Ecolo intends to guarantee the working conditions of federal scientific establishments in the long term: infrastructure, resources37, personnel (changes in status, integration of contract personnel, etc.).
Ecolo also advocates the maintenance of existing research programmes to support decision-making and inter-university centres of attraction, alongside Belgian space policy, the polar base and the Antarctic research programme.
Research in support of decision-making (lasting 2 to 5 years), upstream of applied research, represents an important link enabling policies to be carried out on a scientifically sound basis.
Finally, according to Ecolo, the federal state is undoubtedly the most appropriate level to meet our international commitments in terms of research, particularly in matters of biodiversity, climate change and sustainable development.
Thinking about research on a European scale
All the triple dividend sectors (environmental, social, economic) of the “new green economy” have clear development potential.
Ecolo wants Belgium to weigh in on the strategic choices made in European investment plans to support “green” research.
In order to promote European research, Ecolo also proposes the creation of a European quality label, which would particularly encourage the publication and online dissemination of high-level interdisciplinary research.
Finally, the restrictive way in which the scope of the scientific visa has been defined in Belgium makes it ineffective in relation to its stated objective.
Ecolo therefore wishes to make the European scientific visa a practical reality in order to promote the mobility and networking of researchers.
Ensuring the independence of research
The privatization and commercialization of research is a fundamental issue for Ecolo.
Although they undoubtedly represent formidable tools for economic redeployment, research and innovation cannot be considered solely through their socio-economic dimension.
Research is increasingly at risk of being subject to profitability logic demanded by investors and industrial sectors.
Ecolo defends the principle of the independence of public research.
The results of research carried out in our countries to combat climate change or improve health, for example, must be shared with countries in the South.
At both the Belgian and European levels, Ecolo intends to promote and defend the idea of ​​the exchange of knowledge and fundamental and technical skills for the benefit of the community, and will oppose a utilitarian and mercantile vision guaranteeing profits rather than the sharing of knowledge.
37 Multi-year programs in strategic and fundamental research, programs for the preservation and promotion of collections, including information (databases).
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity Axis Social security and fight against poverty
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Social security and the fight against poverty
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
The Belgians are, collectively, among the richest people in the world.
Overall, their wealth continues to grow.
Their total assets amount to approximately €2,000 billion, or 47% more than in 2002.
A household therefore has an average wealth of €374,000.
However, the calculation of the average value of Belgian household assets ignores the growing inequalities in the distribution of this wealth.
At the same time as overall wealth increases, we are indeed witnessing a general rise in socio-economic insecurity.
And this phenomenon of insecurity is reinforced by the environmental, social and financial crisis that we are experiencing: around 700,000 workers find themselves unemployed38 and around 1,600,000 Belgians live below the poverty line (defined at 60% of the median income).
In a developed country like Belgium, around 180,000 people have to postpone medical care every year for financial reasons;
more and more people are no longer able to pay their bills;
more than 600,000 people live in inadequately heated housing and more than 2 million people report having difficulty, or even great difficulty, in "making ends meet" at the end of the month39.
The risk of poverty is 20% among those over 65 and 25% among those over 7540.
It is also appropriate to pay particular attention to certain vulnerable groups.
Thus, the phenomenon of the feminization of poverty41 is growing:
financial difficulties for one in five women;
difficulties in accessing housing or health care for themselves and their families;
confrontation with different forms of violence and discrimination.
Women also represent 80% of poor employees and benefit from a lower pension than their male counterparts.
Similarly, although it is reasonable to say that having a job is the best protection against job insecurity, the fact remains that the poverty rate among Belgian workers is 4.3% and is constantly increasing.
Thus, precariousness does not only affect social security recipients and retirees, it also concerns more and more workers, and particularly female workers.
Belgium is no longer spared from the phenomenon of the working poor.
Work, when accessible, is no longer a guarantee against financial difficulties.
As Béa CANTILLON42 points out, “social security is currently less effective in the fight against poverty than it was two decades ago.”
38 P.DEFEYT, Institute for Sustainable Development, 2010. 39 Source: EUSILC 2006 and EUSILC 2007 – FPS Economy – Statistics and Economic Information Directorate. 40 In 2009, the poverty risk threshold was set at €878 for a single person; €1,142 for a single parent with two children, €1,845 for a couple with two children. 41 For our proposals concerning equality between women and men, see Chapter Equality between women and men. 42 CANTILLON, Béa. To what extent is social security still social and reassuring? Thoughts on the future of social security in Belgium. Belgian Social Security Review – 4th quarter 2005.
In this context, some have developed the hypothesis of limiting tomorrow's social security to a strict insurance mission, thus overturning a 60-year-old model.
Ecolo opposes this perspective and advocates the explicit assignment of four missions to social security (insurance, solidarity, emancipation and social cohesion) and reaffirms its collective, public, federal character and jointly managed within the framework of a global budget.
Our proposals are all structured around these four missions.
Ecolo's proposals
Allow everyone to live on a decent income
Ecolo has made several proposals to enable everyone to live on a decent income:
to raise the Social Integration Income (RIS) and the minimum level of replacement benefits (allowances for disabled people, invalidity, unemployment, pensions) above the poverty line43;
Since the category of working poor is only increasing, increase the minimum wage to 1.
€450 gross per month (compared to €1.
€361 gross as of October 1, 2008);
economic studies show that the minimum wage is not the enemy of employment; on the contrary, when the minimum wage is too low, as is currently the case, it does not provide sufficient incentive to work;
re-evaluate the smallest pensions in order to avoid the slide into poverty of an ever-increasing number of retirees44;
establish a single family allowance system regardless of the social status of the parents;
family allowances are a child's right;
Ecolo therefore proposes that the allowance for the first child of the self-employed worker45 be aligned with the family allowance of the salaried worker and that the allowance for the first child be gradually increased to the level of that currently allocated for the second child46.
In addition to this, Ecolo proposes to deepen the individualization of rights, including at the level of the right to RIS.
This proposal aims to take into account the evolution of families, to eliminate current discrimination linked to marital status or cohabitation, and to allow each adult to benefit from their own rights, regardless of their private ties with another adult.
In fact, while contributions are collected individually, the same is not true for the granting of benefits, where it is the notion of household which prevails in the case of unemployment and pensions in particular.
In absolute terms, this takes place to the detriment of the principle of equality, and, in concrete terms, most often to the detriment of women.
This also leads, in certain situations, to costly and devastating circumvention strategies for social ties.
Concretely, Ecolo proposes the establishment of transitional regimes allowing, for acquired situations, an individualization of rights by level and by age cohort, with the priority of eliminating the "cohabitant" category in the unemployment and "disability" benefit regimes and a general alignment of benefits and rights with the current "single" category.
In this perspective of individualization, the progressive reconversion of the marital quotient will also be considered, where appropriate by replacing it with a flat-rate reimbursable tax credit.
43 A bill was tabled to this effect in 2007 by the EcoloGroen group! in the federal parliament but was defeated by all the parties of the liberal-socialist-humanist majority.44 See Chapter Seniors – Pensions of the 2010 Ecolo Programmatic Platform. 45 See Chapter SME Independents of the 2010 Ecolo Programmatic Platform. 46 Beyond this standardization, Ecolo wants to replace the back-to-school allowance with a full thirteenth month of family allowances paid in August. In 2008, the back-to-school allowance was only between €25 and €74 depending on the child's age.
Finally, it is important to fully link social benefits to well-being, starting with the lowest benefits as a priority, in order to prevent the gap between the income of workers and the income of social welfare recipients.
Furthermore, it is desirable to establish an annual income level, set at €1 million per year, beyond which the additional income would be paid, up to 90%, to a solidarity fund for the financing of the Social Integration Income.
Guarantee access to fundamental rights for all
For Ecolo, it is essential that public authorities implement the necessary policies to enable everyone to exercise their fundamental rights.
At the federal level, these policies must prioritize access to health care, housing and (savings on) energy.
Ensuring access to health care for all47
In a developed country like Belgium, 180,000 people had to postpone medical care for financial reasons;
More and more people are no longer able to pay their bills following hospitalization.
It is therefore appropriate to take measures to ensure access to care for everyone.
Ecolo is thus proposing to make access to Omnio status automatic for people whose income is below the income ceiling giving entitlement to increased reimbursements.
Ecolo also intends to increase the reimbursement rate for general medicine for all insured persons, facilitate the application of the third-party payment system in general medicine and improve the transparency of prices.
Guarantee housing for everyone48
Housing is a basic fundamental right for every person.
Access to adequate housing must therefore be ensured for everyone.
Unfortunately, an increasing share of household income is spent on housing.
Alongside the regional policy on public housing, Ecolo proposes in particular:
to act on the private market in order to combat the deregulation of rents and to set a reference rent;
to create a federal rental guarantee fund for low incomes;
to increase the number of affordable housing units for households with precarious, modest or average incomes;
to prohibit illegal evictions and to allow the introduction of an action for cessation for tenants who are victims of illegal eviction.
Guaranteeing accessibility for all (to energy savings)
A life in accordance with human dignity implies being able to heat oneself, light oneself, wash oneself, and eat oneself.
However, the most disadvantaged people generally live in poorly insulated, energy-intensive housing.
The share of the budget devoted to energy is taking an increasingly important place in household budgets, with the risk that these families will find themselves in a situation of (over)indebtedness.
47 See the “Health” chapter of Ecolo’s 2010 programmatic platform. 48 See the “Housing” chapter of Ecolo’s 2010 programmatic platform.
The liberalisation of the electricity and gas market has led to often excessive price increases.
Ecolo therefore proposes that control of gas and electricity prices be re-established and that independent market regulation tools be strengthened.
This is why Ecolo has tabled a bill to strengthen the power of the Electricity and Gas Regulatory Commission (CREG)49, so that it is able to exercise real price control, which is currently insufficiently the case.
Closer coordination between European regulators should also make it possible to play on a level playing field with energy multinationals.
The status of protected customer for electricity and gas is exclusively linked to the status of the beneficiary, but not to their income.
So many people who have the same income as protected customers do not benefit from this protection, which is unfair.
It is therefore necessary to extend the status of protected customer to people with low incomes, as is the case for beneficiaries of the fuel oil fund.
Finally, Ecolo intends that households with precarious or modest incomes, including tenants, benefit as a priority from proactive policies in terms of energy savings and energy efficiency50.
Strengthening and modernizing the missions and pillars of social security
Despite its alternative financing, social security has structural difficulty in achieving budgetary balance and fulfilling its missions of redistribution and intervention in the event of accidents.
This year, social security therefore has an overall deficit of €2.742 billion (0.8%), which could only be covered by borrowing.
Social security for salaried workers shows a deficit of €3.222 billion.
Thanks to the 4.5% growth standard maintained throughout the legislature, the healthcare sector shows a surplus of €549 million.
Social security for the self-employed recorded a surplus of €70 million.
Generally speaking, social security seems increasingly ill-equipped to fulfil the four explicit missions that environmentalists assign to it:
insurance (against the hazards of life), solidarity (redistribution of wealth between the less well-off and the more well-off), emancipation (springboard for citizens) and social cohesion (fight against social disengagement).
We are in fact witnessing an erosion of the insurance coverage of our system.
The replacement rate of minimum benefits continues to fall, due to the lack of a real link to well-being.
So much so that, for example, more and more pensioners are now living below the poverty risk threshold.
The observation is identical with regard to the amount of disability benefits or that of unemployment benefits (particularly for cohabiting persons who are purely and simply deprived of the benefit of the insurance nature of unemployment risk coverage).
For Ecolo, social security, much more than a minimal safety net, with increasingly wide meshes, must remain a real springboard which allows citizens to emancipate themselves, to launch themselves or to relaunch themselves, whatever the moment of their life.
Through its “social cohesion” mission, it contributes to the fight against social disengagement which threatens our societies.
Furthermore, by organising, as part of its solidarity mission, a redistribution of wealth between the most and least well-off, social security contributes to economic activity, since its beneficiaries are also consumers and, conversely, the savings of the most well-off households contribute above all to reinforcing the weight of finance on the economy.
49 Federal regulator of the electricity and gas market 50 See the “Energy – Climate” chapter of Ecolo’s 2010 programmatic platform.
Beyond the four missions of social security (insurance, solidarity, emancipation and social cohesion), we wish to reaffirm the following principles to which we are particularly attached:
The social security system is, and must remain, a public collective system;
the strengthening that we are carrying out must be part of this framework and not develop through the privatization of certain sectors;
The historical principle of joint management of social security between social partners must be strengthened;
our proposals for refinancing social security are tools which will make it possible to avoid systematically putting social partners in a position of demand and dependence on the government;
Social security must remain federal in its financing and in its coverage mechanisms;
environmentalists are attached to an interpersonal conception of solidarity and not an interregional, interprovincial or interlocal conception;
only an interpersonal conception, because it frees us from systems of allegiance of all kinds, allows us to move beyond notions of assistance or charity;
in this sense, we will oppose any desire, even partial, to regionalize social security;
the management of social security budgets must remain global;
If structural bonuses were to emerge in certain branches, they could, where appropriate, be allocated to others, in particular to cover new needs.
Making capital income contribute more to solidarity
In this context, another organisation of social protection financing which makes it possible to cope with the social and demographic developments of the society in which it operates, such as the ageing of the population51, is essential to ensure the dynamism, credibility and legitimacy of the system.
Social security is currently mainly financed by social security contributions: these still provide two thirds of its revenue.
The transfer of tax revenues through alternative financing is complementary, as is the State subsidy.
These three categories of revenue provide the bulk of the financing of social protection.
The establishment of alternative financing was made necessary by several developments since the birth of social security at the end of the Second World War.
Expenditure has followed an upward trend: universalization of access to solidarity, lengthening of life expectancy, unemployment which has become structural, increase in expenditure on health care (overconsumption, technological developments, etc.).
Revenues are put under pressure by the heavy competitive context of a globalized free market economy and with a high rate of inactivity, social security often becoming an instrument of a certain employment policy via the massive granting of reductions in social security contributions.
It is in this context that for years now, Ecolo has been proposing to make capital income contribute more to the financing of solidarity within the framework of social security and to introduce a rebalanced social contribution.
The universalization of access to the protections offered and our desire to develop them further must in fact be accompanied by a modification of the structure of contributory deductions for social security.
The financing of social protection must be developed to make it more diversified and more equitable, and to ensure that its spontaneous evolution is at least as rapid as that of GDP.
We therefore propose the introduction of a Rebalanced Social Contribution (CSR) which would make all income contribute to solidarity, and would make it possible to eliminate socially unfair contributions and ease the pressure on work, particularly low-skilled work.
This rebalancing must involve a contribution from all income, including capital.
51 See the chapter “Elderly – Pensions” of Ecolo’s 2010 programmatic platform.
Retaining a broad base allows for a lower tax rate while preserving the volume of revenue.
Furthermore, introducing an exemption at the base ensures a certain progressiveness of the levy, while avoiding it being excessive in a system where redistribution is done more through benefits than through levies.
Proposing a flat-rate deduction also means avoiding opening the debate on exemptions by nature while reducing the “traps”, since low wages and unemployment benefits would be treated in a similar manner.
The main reason for establishing a CSR is to change the philosophy of financing social protection:
The CSR aims to be an instrument for fair and sustainable financing of social protection that responds to changes in coverage, while transferring part of the taxation of work to the taxation of capital.
A CSR based on individual and business income, as proposed here, has the properties required to meet this objective.
Linking federal funding to growth and longevity
In addition to this rebalancing, Ecolo proposes that funding from the federal budget be linked to growth and to the increase in the population's lifespan;
which will further contribute to the dynamic aspect that we want to introduce to the system as the lifetime increases steadily.
This is a way of making the increase in the social security budget natural and not easily unravelled, taking into account variables that have an influence on its expenditure, if only in terms of the burden on the pension budget.
Controlling expenses
Maintaining a strong growth standard in the health care budget has protected this sector from short-term needs.
Reserves (future funds for health care) were created and aid was granted to other sectors.
This positive budgetary situation is beneficial, given the essential role of the health sector in solidarity and its reality in terms of jobs created.
This budgetary growth must not, however, be a pretext for “misspending”.
It is therefore necessary to continue to revalue primary care, which avoids higher costs downstream, and to develop, in collaboration with the Communities, prevention in health care.
Likewise, it is essential to continue the standardisation of hospital funding, and to seriously begin the structuring into treatment areas to move away from the logic of sterile competition which is a source of duplication and unnecessary expenditure.
Acting for social integration
Guaranteeing CPAS sufficient means of action
Currently, the reimbursement of integration income by the federal state is equivalent to 50% for CPAS.
It rises to 60% for CPAS which have at least 500 beneficiaries and to 65% when they have at least 1,000.
For Ecolo, this funding must be increased to 90% and the federal government must ensure that the impacts of its policies on CPAS are better taken into account, in order to increase solidarity between the inhabitants of our country, regardless of the municipality in which they live.
Avoid making employment the only factor for social integration
Most CPAS have developed an “integration pathway” for RIS beneficiaries.
Thus, the CPAS “insertion” budgets doubled from 2001 to 2006 and the number of “article 60” jobs, for example, increased thirteenfold in 15 years.
But the logic of this path cannot be exclusively utilitarian (availability of cheap labor, improvement of the employment rate).
We must respect people's choices, work on the basis of an individualised integration project in which they are involved as actors and not forget that, in addition to access to employment, these people experience other social difficulties for which support remains essential (housing, health, family situation, etc.).
The quality of jobs and their outcome (sustainable reintegration) must take precedence over the “cashmere” effect.
For Ecolo, it is also necessary to design certain social activities as "relays" for training activities or employment periods and to gradually recognize those which respond to a specific need.
The feeling of uselessness or the breakdown after periods of activity (training, employment, etc.) too often affects the mental state of people who sometimes go through difficult periods.
On the other hand, social integration (such as building a social project with other partners, combining both social activities and cooperative mutual aid) provides social support and better well-being, and in particular results in a proactive attitude towards life in general and employment opportunities in particular.
Simplify access to aid and inform citizens
To request and obtain additional assistance, the person already in difficulty must often undergo complex administrative procedures, even when these difficulties are already recognized.
Any new aid generally involves a new social investigation with the obligation to prove one's precarious situation again, all within the framework of great administrative complexity (Omnio status, energy fund, medical card, rental guarantee, school fees, reduction on transport costs, etc.).
As a result, many people give up the benefit of Omnio status because they cannot take the necessary steps.
Only 20% of people who meet the criteria for Omnio status have taken steps to obtain it.
Ecolo therefore proposes to facilitate the administrative procedures required of citizens through significant administrative simplification measures.
Preventing over-indebtedness
In a period of financial turmoil, it is not only the banks that suffer, but also, and above all, consumers.
Purchasing power is deteriorating.
As problems never come alone, people who can no longer pay their bills often enter a spiral of debt, from which it is very difficult to escape, especially alone.
Moreover, some credit companies are taking advantage of this opportunity by offering easy credits at usurious rates.
Ecolo therefore proposes to cap usurious interest rates, by limiting by law the maximum percentage of annual charges for all consumer credits, for example to 9% in the current financial context.
The credit facility is generally granted for an indefinite period.
The consumer therefore runs a great risk of falling into permanent debt.
The existence of permanent credit (or revolving credit) in fact offers the consumer the possibility of continually taking out new loans, without having to complete new formalities.
Instead of quickly repaying the amount(s) borrowed, the less attentive consumer will tend to repay only the minimum monthly amount.
Ecolo therefore proposes to limit these possibilities in order to prevent over-indebtedness.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity Axis Seniors Pensions
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Elderly Pensions
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Average life expectancy increased by 24 years in the 20th century and continues to increase:
In Belgium, we are currently gaining a quarter of an year in life expectancy!
Belgium now has nearly 2 million pensioners, or around 1/5 of its population.
For various reasons, including the arrival of baby boomers in retirement, the falling birth rate and the increase in life expectancy, this proportion will only increase in the coming years.
One in four Belgians will be over 60 in 2030!
These developments inevitably lead to upheavals in economic and social terms and in terms of the organization of society.
However, since the 1980s, there has been an erosion in certain social security coverage.
With almost constant budgets, the universalization of access to social security is, in part, a corollary to a progressive erosion of the level of social protection per insured person.
This erosion is particularly palpable in the pension sector, and even more so for the lowest and oldest among them.
In fact, little by little, the legal pension has been limited to guaranteeing basic protection.
Thus, the average legal pension today is €1,115.
This amount, however, hides major inequalities between pensioners, particularly between men and women, with regard to pensioners in the private sector, depending on the period of taking the pension... In this context, it is therefore hardly surprising to note that the risk of poverty today stands at 20% for those over 65 and 25% for those over 75.
This situation is not acceptable.
For Ecolo, it is therefore urgent to implement reforms aimed at ensuring the financial viability of the system and to revalue pensions, starting with the lowest.
Past mismanagement of public finances endangers the future financing of pensions and must be remedied with confidence and determination.
However, preparing for population ageing is not limited to ensuring the financial sustainability of our system and ensuring decent incomes.
For Ecolo, it is also essential to ensure a quality life for retired people by allowing them, among other things, to participate in society.
Leisure, care and support for the elderly also constitute an important source of employment in the non-profit sector.
Ecolo's proposals
Combating the economic decline of seniors
Providing elderly people with income that allows them to live with dignity
Many statutory pensions are currently too low to live on with dignity.
Around 20% of pensioners live below the poverty line (more women than men, proportionally more single pensioners than households).
More than 900,000 pensioners (46% of them) have to live on a pension of less than €1,000 per month and almost 300,000 pensioners receive a pension of less than €500.
Meanwhile, energy and food prices are constantly increasing, leading to more and more dramatic situations, unworthy of a modern society.
For Ecolo, the urgent thing is first of all to revalue the smallest pensions (in particular those of women, the self-employed and the oldest beneficiaries).
It is therefore appropriate to raise the minimum pensions, for both employees and the self-employed, to at least €1,150 per month52.
For people whose pension remains below the poverty threshold despite this revaluation, Ecolo proposes that the right to the Guaranteed Income for the Elderly (GRAPA) be individualized and that its amount be raised above the poverty threshold.
Finally, so that these two groups can meet the costs inherent in possible losses of autonomy, we propose extending aid to the elderly (see below).
Furthermore, it is also urgent to re-establish the link between pensions and workers' wage developments, to prevent the gap between pensions and the wages received by workers from continuing to grow.
A mechanism was set up a few years ago to ensure a link between pensions and well-being within the framework of the Generations Pact.
But, without mentioning the other measures of this Pact which put pressure on older workers, this system remains imperfect and can, at best and depending on the proposals of the social partners, only slow down the gap between pensioners and employees.
The resources included in the budget are in fact neither capable of filling the holes dug in the past, nor of re-establishing a structural link to well-being.
Secondly, Ecolo proposes to increase average pensions.
In fact, the net replacement rate53 of people who benefit from an average income is lower in Belgium than the average for OECD countries (65.3% compared to 71.8%).
Belgium is close to a group of countries that have a low statutory pension supplemented by supplementary pensions.
Ten years after retirement, the replacement rate provided by the 1st pillar also falls from 36.5% to 31.4% compared to the last salary, which places the coverage offered in Belgium in last position in the EU 15, with the exception of the United Kingdom! Over the years, the level of Belgian pensions has become very low compared to most European countries.
It is therefore appropriate to revalue average statutory pensions, by consolidating the 1st pillar and, for example, by modifying the method of calculating statutory pensions.
52 Compared to approximately €1,000 at present for employees and a little less than €950 for the self-employed, for a full career. 53 The net replacement rate is defined as net individual pension rights divided by net salary, taking into account IRPP (personal income tax) and social security contributions paid by employees and retirees.
Taking gender into account in the pensions debate
The gender dimension is too rarely taken into account in debates around pensions.
However, except for statutory public service employees, the differences between statutory pensions for men and women, both for employees and the self-employed, are very significant.
For example, a male employee receives an average pension of €1,111 per month, while a female employee receives an average of only €634.
As for self-employed workers, they receive on average more than double that of their female counterparts (respectively €800 in retirement compared to €300).
The causes include salary differences throughout a career and reduced availability, often forced, on the job market.
Income from the 2nd pension pillar (supplementary pensions) is not, moreover, of great benefit to women.
The proportion of female employees receiving a 2nd pillar pension is only 19% (compared to 49% for men54).
The higher the income from the 1st pension pillar, the greater the proportion of retirees with access to the 2nd pillar.
However, only a limited group of retired women belong to the highest income categories, which explains the generally low level of access to the 2nd pillar.
Furthermore, the amounts granted under this 2nd pillar are on average lower for the (few) women who benefit from it than for men.
Finally, the current system of derived rights creates numerous discriminations between married and unmarried women and between women who work and those who do not.
Some women must therefore choose between their income or their survivor's pension;
Others, who have worked all their lives, have a less decent pension than some women who have never worked and receive a survivor's pension.
In this context, Ecolo will pay particular attention to the level of legal pensions:
to identify measures to eliminate inexplicable salary differences between men and women and to propose their implementation, so that the amounts of pensions earned follow the same path;
to review the policy of assimilations (periods of professional inactivity which are nevertheless considered in the calculation of pensions) in order to less penalize certain life choices, often imposed, of women.
More broadly, Ecolo also intends to gradually implement a process of individualization of social security rights, while guaranteeing the maintenance of currently acquired rights.
Developing autonomy insurance within the framework of social security
Ecolo proposes to establish federal autonomy insurance to allow everyone to live independently for as long as possible.
Belgium is in fact one of the EU countries which devotes the least public resources to non-medical care for the elderly.
And this, while the needs in this area are constantly evolving with the uninterrupted increase in life expectancy and the evolution of family nuclei.
Ecolo wants to extend the security and protections offered to the elderly to counter the process of impoverishment within the framework of refinanced social security.
Through this autonomy insurance, the aim will be to meet the needs relating to home help (meals, presence, housekeeping, non-medical care), maintaining ties and social life or active leisure activities, arranging living spaces, loss of autonomy or even occasional support for families and/or relatives taking charge of an elderly person or a person in loss of autonomy.
54 J. Berghmans, G. Curvers, S. Palmans, H. Vandermeerschen, R. Verpoorten, “Adequate pensions for retired households, Amount and composition of overall pensions at household level”, CeSO, KUL, 2009.
of autonomy.
This response will contribute both to the quality of life of the elderly and those around them, as well as to the creation of new jobs and the achievement of savings in the area of ​​social security, since this aid can replace, reduce or postpone a stay in hospital or a specialized institution.
Improving access to the Elderly Allowance (APA)
At the beginning of the 2000s, there were already 183,000 people over the age of 65 with moderate or severe loss of autonomy.
Given the context, this number is still expected to increase sharply.
Help from close caregivers or professionals is essential for carrying out several daily tasks (household chores, shopping, administrative tasks, nursing, etc.).
) However, the costs of such care for dependent persons range on average from €50 to €375 per month;
without including in this calculation the costs of hotel accommodation or accommodation in a retirement home (on average €1,167 per month excluding supplements).
Therefore, while waiting for the implementation of autonomy insurance covered by social security and in a context of anxiety regarding the future of our pension system, Ecolo proposes to strengthen the support provided to the most vulnerable people in our society, because they are older or more dependent.
A bill aimed at further supporting the autonomy of the elderly was adopted in the House55.
This proposal aims to facilitate access to the allowance for the elderly, by reducing the income ceilings from which the elderly have access to it and by increasing the financial intervention of the latter.
This measure must also be accompanied by increased control of the prices of stays in rest homes and nursing and care homes, as well as work on the quality of reception and life in these institutions.
Ensuring the financial viability of the statutory pension (1st pillar)
To ensure the budgetary sustainability of statutory pensions without affecting the effectiveness of our pension system, different levers must be used in concert.
Linking the pension debate to the debate on creating quality jobs and promoting employment for workers over 50
For Ecolo, financing the revaluation of legal pensions requires the creation of new jobs.
The State then receives more resources without increasing the contribution rate on work, since the number of contributors increases.
If there is indeed a significant creation of new jobs, the idea of ​​increasing the effective retirement age can be supported, without, however, there being any question of modifying the legal retirement age.
This proposal is, however, only sustainable if:
where the specific nature of careers and the professional load of each person is taken into account to adjust the age and conditions of departure;
one job is not like another and some functions are more difficult than others due to their physical or psychological burden, which justifies very legitimate relief measures at the end of a career;
the increase is progressive over time, with each cohort of workers gradually seeing this effective duration increase;
there is an actual and visible advantage to working longer;
reflection is carried out on the quality of jobs throughout the professional career.
Furthermore, some workers over 50 would like to work but cannot, since they are not considered sufficiently "productive" and cannot find any employer willing to recruit them.
In this regard, we propose:
to provide funding for the extension of the tandem plan56 or the implementation of a tutoring system;
ode to reinvest heavily in training offered to workers throughout their careers57.
Gradually return to a balanced budget and manage the aging fund efficiently and fairly
In order to ensure the financial sustainability of the pension system, it is also necessary to ensure a balanced budget, in order to reduce the debt burden and generate new revenue for the public authorities.
It is indeed necessary to note the increasing deterioration of public finances since 2003, taking into account the impact of the financial crisis but above all, before that, the laxity of the Purple Government and the outgoing Government.
This policy is not sustainable and ultimately threatens the budgetary sustainability of public policies.
Ecolo therefore intends to ensure a gradual return to budgetary balance, while naturally preserving social spending and investment capacity in the society of tomorrow.
The aging fund should also be managed intelligently and responsibly.
This, set up under the Arcenciel government, was intended to guarantee the payment of future pensions and thus ensure the preservation of solidarity between generations.
It was part of a multi-year perspective of State debt reduction and aimed at the pre-allocation of one-off or structural budgetary revenues to the future cost of pensions.
In total, more than €15 billion has been gradually “set aside” for this purpose.
This approach made perfect sense.
Unfortunately, little by little, the budgetary trajectories defined by the Study Committee on Ageing were abandoned by the Purple Government and the outgoing Government, more eager to flatter certain electorates in the short term with policies of announcements and windfall effects than to ensure solidarity with future generations.
The financial crisis and the economic crisis that followed it have accelerated this trend, now largely jeopardizing the continuation of this ant-like policy.
The return of significant debt raises the issue in a new light and calls for new scenarios to ensure tomorrow's pensions.
In any case, we propose to use the resources thus saved within the aging fund for the purposes originally intended.
Making capital income contribute more to solidarity
The extension of social protection has usefully made universal a certain number of benefits which, at the origin of social security, were reserved only for people present on the labour market and who contributed to its financing.
The fundamental change in the structure of expenditure linked to the extension of rights has not, however, been followed by a change in the structure of revenue.
It is therefore necessary to develop the financing of social protection to make it more diversified and more equitable, and to ensure that its spontaneous evolution is at least as rapid as that of the GDP.
We therefore propose the introduction of a rebalanced social contribution which makes all income contribute to solidarity.
This would help ease pressure on work, particularly low-skilled work.
This rebalancing must in particular involve a contribution from capital income, the relative share of which in GDP increases each year compared to wages.
56 The tandem plan allows an experienced worker to gradually ease off or work part-time while assuming a supporting role, tutoring a new worker in the company.57 See the chapter “Employment – ​​Activities – Time” of the 2010 programmatic platform.
Reform the 2nd and 3rd pension pillars and direct their investments towards sustainable development
It must be noted that funded pension systems reinforce inequalities.
It is the workers who benefit from the best pensions via the 1st pillar who most often benefit from significant income via the 2nd and/or 3rd pillar.
This is what some call the Mathieu58 effect.
On the other hand, certain sectors (notably non-profit), certain types of work (including temporary work or service vouchers) or certain people (mainly women with incomplete or regularly interrupted careers) do not have the same possibility as others of contributing to these supplementary pensions.
Today, more than 40% of salaried workers are still excluded from the system.
Capitalization systems are also costly for the community:
These supplementary pensions generate tax deductions for companies (2nd pillar) or individuals (3rd pillar) with a significant drop in revenue for the State.
These indirect costs are too rarely taken into account.
Furthermore, pensions built via 2nd and 3rd pillars are also less secure.
The financial crisis we experienced a few months ago illustrates, if proof were needed, how risky this type of investment can be.
Finally, these funds participate in the financialization of the economy, the serious consequences of which have been noted both in the context of the financial crisis and in the context of painful decisions to relocate companies, fueled solely by the search for maximum financial profits.
Given these difficulties, Ecolo considers it necessary to further mark out these systems.
Direct part of the funds from the 2nd and 3rd pillars towards sustainable and ethical investments and improve the regulatory and prudential framework of the second pillar
Ecolo has long been calling for better regulation and guidance of investments made by these pension funds.
Prudential rules must be adopted and criteria for directing these investments, particularly towards sustainable and solidarity sectors, such as the social economy, must be established.
As stated in a bill it has tabled, Ecolo wishes to make the tax advantages enjoyed by investments in 2nd and 3rd pillar pension funds, as well as investments made by the Aging Fund, conditional on compliance with requirements in terms of stability of the investments made, ethics and sustainable development.
One possibility in this regard is to pool these funds into a sovereign fund59.
Make capitalization as supportive as possible
When a 2nd pillar by capitalization is set up for a category of workers, by necessity or by opportunity (instead of salary advantages in certain sectors), it is necessary to ensure that it is as united as possible (between high and low salaries and on the broadest possible basis).
In this context, Ecolo proposes to only benefit from more advantageous taxation on 2nd pillar pension commitments which contain a strong solidarity component.
Solidarity aspects certainly already exist within certain pension plans (so-called social plans).
However, for Ecolo, the solidarity criteria included should be significantly strengthened.
At present, the "solidarity" component should only correspond to funding of at least 4.40% of the pension contribution, which is largely insufficient.
Solidarity criteria should also be extended to all pension plans.
At the end of 2007, only 50% of the 24 sectoral pension schemes were in fact social plans and almost no company plans were recognised as such.
58 The Matthew Effect refers, in a very general manner, to the mechanisms by which the most advantaged tend to increase their advantage over others. 59 See the chapter “Ecological transition of the economy” of the 2010 programmatic platform.
Establishing the conditions for “aging well”
Detecting and preventing aging risks when retiring
Retirement does not in itself have a negative impact on health but it represents an important transition in life.
Indeed, in a society where professional involvement and activity often constitute important identity markers and guarantees of success, leaving professional life, even after a full and successful career, is a turning point that is not always easy to understand.
Between hyperactivity and the need for well-deserved rest, young pensioners must find their balance, and adapt it to the evolution of their physical capacities in particular.
At the risk of missing the turning point and seeing retirement rhyme with the onset of health problems.
It is therefore necessary, from a prevention perspective, that seniors are informed, supported and encouraged to find and maintain their balance, by stimulating their abilities and enhancing their potential.
With this in mind, Ecolo proposes to:
o− promote retirement preparation sessions;
o− create a “passport for an active retirement” given to anyone who retires;
o− provide for a medical consultation upon retirement or cessation of activities;
o− then promote the preventive role of the general practitioner in the regular monitoring of pensioners;
o− to send every five years, from the age of 30, a letter to all workers detailing their future pension rights.
Providing the close caregiver with a status
To date, there are no provisions aimed at supporting the role of informal caregivers and making their living conditions acceptable, whether in terms of income, time, access to information or places for discussion.
However, given that the rapid ageing of the population is not accompanied by the development of related services, it is more than likely that institutions will not be able to absorb, on their own, the need to care for a growing part of the population.
It is therefore the families and relatives who will have to bear the cost.
It often happens that the main family caregiver (spouse, child, brother or sister, etc.) takes on the bulk of the physical and moral burden of providing home care to a dependent person, with serious consequences in terms of finances, quality of life and social ties.
This situation currently concerns the "pivot" generation of women between 50 and 65 years old who, although active in their professional and family lives, must assume responsibility for supporting parents who are losing their independence.
In addition to the need to make external home assistance more accessible materially and financially, recognition must be given to the family carer and their role.
Ecolo therefore proposes:
o− to grant tax benefits to the family caregiver;
o− to ensure that their social rights (health care, pensions, etc.) are maintained during the period of their life devoted to caring for a loved one;
o− to provide particular support to associations and services organizing support (training, places for discussion, etc.) for “natural caregivers”.
This framework must be integrated into the more global approach to autonomy insurance that Ecolo proposes to establish at the federal level, with the family carer being able, in addition, to be supported or replaced by a professional carer.
Better prevention and management of dementia, particularly Alzheimer's disease
Senile dementia constitutes a major challenge for our Western societies.
Today, it is estimated that around 150,000 people suffer from it, including 80,000 from Alzheimer's disease alone.
Since 2003, Flanders has set up a reference centre and centres of expertise (information for patients and their relatives, coordination of training, survey of specialist institutions, etc.).
Ecolo hopes that this issue will be addressed within CIMES (Inter-Ministerial Conference on the Environment and Health), so that a coordinated action plan can be set up, aimed at developing both preventive approaches to these diseases and their management and support to be provided to the relatives of patients.
Promoting the role of the elderly in society
Elderly people often play an important role in educating children, providing logistical support and supervision, whether within families, but also in homework schools, libraries, daycare centers, etc.
This link is essential, both for the people who implement this concrete solidarity and for those who benefit from it.
Indeed, like any other individual, the elderly person needs to maintain a network of human relationships, both for their personal emotional balance and for the importance of maintaining social ties.
This essential role of the elderly must be valued and facilitated, for example, for those who wish to do so, within the framework of the law on volunteering, among other things via State coverage of the insurance costs and compensation of these volunteers.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity Health Axis
Health
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Our health system faces many challenges.
The constant increase in expenditure, the improvement of medical technologies and the ageing of the population require reorientations if we want, in the decades to come, to guarantee a quality, diversified and accessible healthcare offer for everyone.
Demographic developments must be taken into account in their multiple facets:
the demographic boom in large cities, the aging of the population with questions of the social role of the elderly and new needs (services, autonomy insurance) for a quality of life.
Furthermore, the gap between different social categories in the area of ​​health has widened significantly in recent years.
As a study published in May 2010 shows, life expectancy increases more significantly for people with higher education, for example60.
In terms of the organisation of health care, Ecolo notes with regret that successive Health Ministers have not succeeded in reversing the "hospital-centric" trend:
Although they are essential, specialties continue to monopolize the majority of resources for both doctors and nurses, while general practitioners are lacking and a majority of medical and nursing students are destined for specialized medicine.
In mental health, Ecolo notes with satisfaction the intentions of the outgoing government to reform psychiatry by directing it towards people's living environment.
However, the basis of this reorganization would remain with the hospitals.
Ecolo defends a territorial approach to needs and the development of a network practice based on outpatient services to which hospitals and sheltered housing are complementary.
Therefore, to meet these challenges, it is important in our opinion to act on:
- prevention: most illnesses can be avoided by preventive measures in terms of diet, environment and physical activity;
- the organization of care, so that health professionals are adequately present and organized to meet needs;
- financial access to care for all, which requires regularly adapting solidarity financing of health care and developing local care accessible to all;
- the implementation of a genuine health policy developed in consultation with all stakeholders, which implies a revision of decision-making mechanisms within public health and the INAMI.
60 TAHIB (Tackling Health Inequalities in Belgium), May 3, 2010.
Ecolo's proposals
Implement structural policies to reduce health risks
The federal state has levers in terms of prevention, in particular via consumer protection (products, dangerous substances, etc.), food and food safety, taxation, etc.
In this regard, Ecolo intends in particular to:
develop a strengthened and bold ‘National Nutrition Health Plan’;
ban smoking in cafes, in order to protect customers and, more importantly, workers in the sector;
to promote the development of immunity rather than dependence (vaccines);
combating risks linked to toxic substances and radiation (transposition and control of product and pesticide standards, etc.);
support policies aimed at promoting healthy lifestyle behaviours and physical activity;
failing to put in place a prevention plan to avoid overconsumption of certain medications, in particular antidepressants, Ritalin or medications in nursing homes.
Prevention plans should not focus exclusively on communication, but should also be based on educational theories.
Providing local care, including mental health
Developing a genuine public health policy based on needs assessment
For Ecolo, it is urgent to develop adequate public health tools, both in the field of prevention and in that of care.
In order to develop an efficient health policy, it is essential to organise reliable and rapid collection and processing of epidemiological data, coordinated between the federal state, the Communities and the Regions.
Appropriate communication of results to health stakeholders is also a crucial issue.
Meeting patients’ needs through regulated and local medical services
It is important that medical provision is better regulated to best meet the needs of patients, wherever they live.
To this end, Ecolo has tabled a bill aimed at establishing regulation of the provision of health care by geographical areas, on a territorial basis of care basins.
The objective of this proposal is to improve the distribution of doctors across the territory based on an assessment of healthcare needs, carried out by all direct and indirect healthcare stakeholders in these geographical areas, based on existing healthcare offerings, socio-economic realities and unmet demands.
This regulation would make the use of the numerus clausus system and INAMI quotas, as they exist today, obsolete.
There is a shortage of doctors in certain areas and in certain specialties, while "supernumerary" students will be refused access to medical practice.
Ecolo refuses this waste of resources!
It is also essential that public and non-public hospitals find a way to work together, with the primary objective of meeting the needs of the population, without competition and in order to avoid duplication in the development of specialized services or expensive technical equipment.
It is also appropriate to redefine the tasks of the various healthcare providers and to organise the best possible complementarity instead of the current competition.
Doctors and nurses are faced with inadequately funded procedures, leading to overconsumption, specializations that divert them from outpatient care and comprehensive approaches to patients.
Ecolo advocates greater flat-rate funding for services that values ​​front-line providers.
Valuing the intellectual act
For Ecolo, the valorization of the intellectual act of general practitioners is essential since, under the pressure of the high number of consultations per day, they are sometimes more tempted by the act of prescribing than by the work of listening.
Putting the general practitioner at the centre of the healthcare system
The first point of contact for citizens in matters of health is usually the general practitioner.
The latter knows his patients best, can appreciate the consequences of their medical history and their living environment on their state of health and has sometimes supported them for years.
Both in terms of the quality of the care process, the well-being of the patient and the economy of the overall care system, it is essential to give these doctors a "pivotal" place in the health system.
They also guarantee the quality of care provided to patients, based on their medical, psychological and social needs.
Ecolo intends to give more meaning and strength to primary care medicine by:
the registration of the general practitioner as the pivot of a better organized multidisciplinary system (home care, social assistance, autonomy assistance);
a redefinition and improvement of the relationship between family doctor and hospital, built on a concept of continuity and not competition;
or a staggering of care, via financial encouragement for the patient to first consult his or her general practitioner;
definitive reduction in the co-payment in the event of opening a global medical file to retain patients with their treating physician.
Strengthening and structuring primary care at home
Ecolo proposes to strengthen the provision of care at patients' homes and to involve all outpatient stakeholders, in order to offer quality care.
This becomes all the more important as hospitalizations are reduced to minimum durations, sending home people who are alone, destitute or have dependent families, when convalescence or time for care would be much needed.
In this context, a one-off or daytime reception offer must be put in place.
Repeated re-hospitalizations can thus be avoided.
The patient, the center of the intervention implemented, will obviously be involved.
For this purpose, it is essential:
to structure, in consultation with the Communities and Regions, primary care by care basins via the integrated home care services set up by environmentalists in 2002;
to support the development of multidisciplinary practices integrating various health professions and psychosocial professions.
Promoting the work of nurses
The shortage of nurses in the profession is not linked to the number of qualified nurses but to the abandonment of the profession due to low pay and difficult working conditions, particularly in hospitals.
The role of nurse, although essential, is not sufficiently valued.
The burden on her is getting heavier and heavier;
it has reached the limits of what is bearable in a socio-economic context which is, moreover, unfavourable.
The pay scales are unattractive and the hours are difficult to reconcile with a balanced family life.
This results in a flight of professionals.
The average career length of a nurse is decreasing every year.
The outgoing Minister's "attractiveness" plan is not satisfactory since it does not pay sufficient attention to nurses who work in the home.
Most of the resources are in fact allocated to hospitals.
The recognition of those who specialize only applies to hospital nurses.
Reimbursement of nursing care services performed in hospital is not generalized to the same services performed at home.
However, we will increasingly need competent nurses in outpatient care for:
to address the aging of the population (allowing people to remain independent at home for as long as possible);
to respond to the growing desire to benefit from home care for children, patients at the end of their life, patients who must return home early given the shortening of hospital stays;
to respond to the long-awaited opening of mental health care in the living environment.
In this context, Ecolo proposes in particular:
to develop flying teams of nurses who can replace those in training both in hospitals and at home;
this is possible by maintaining the necessary qualifications;
to allocate sufficient budgets to the training of nurses;
to improve end-of-career outcomes through reductions in working hours coupled with the development of the tandem system (transmission of knowledge and know-how) between experienced nurses and new nurses, between experienced nurses and students;
to promote the role of head nurse;
the difference in salary is today too small compared to the responsibility assumed;
to revalue all nursing functions and not just certain specialties, current policies only value training in specialized nursing and leave general nurses in a “second” zone while they are the ones who monitor the majority of patients both in hospital and at home;
to recognise “general nurse” training as a specialisation in its own right and to recognise the skills acquired through experience and the monitoring of continuing education, thus giving nurses the opportunity to pursue a clinical career;
This should not be reserved only for those who have had the opportunity to specialize after their general studies.
Maintaining specialist doctors within hospital structures
Hospitals must once again become places where specialists can be consulted, as specialists tend to flee hospitals.
Hospital structures must then call on foreign healthcare providers to compensate for these departures and for weekend shifts.
The reasons for these departures are to be found, in large part, in the system of fee retrocession which pushes managers to increase the number of procedures and encourages specialists to leave the hospital.
This system must be reversed.
Hospital financing must be organised on a much more flat-rate basis.
Ecolo believes that:
The flat-rate financing system “by pathology” must be refined and sufficiently flexible to ensure quality care;
the mechanism for differentiating funding based on the pathologies treated and the socio-economic characteristics of the populations received must be expanded;
the extension of flat-rate pricing must go hand in hand with the deployment of a quality control mechanism;
This mechanism must be developed within the framework of a constant dialogue between hospital managers, insurance organizations, health specialists and patient representatives;
The Regions also allocate large budgets for investment in infrastructure;
These must be directed according to an analysis of the needs of the population, taking into account the proportion of more precarious populations.
Finally, there remains the difficult question of the social status of healthcare providers in hospitals, and in particular in public hospitals.
A majority of doctors are traditionally attached to independent status.
But the professional, social and family expectations of young doctors are changing.
The desire for collective or partnership practices is growing.
For Ecolo, the time is perhaps ripe to open the debate on this subject.
Reforming psychiatry and achieving recognition of mental health professions
In 2005, within the framework of the WHO, Belgium signed the Helsinki Declaration, which commits States to reducing the number of psychiatric beds in order to devote more resources to supporting people suffering from psychological distress in their living environment.
The Minister of Health started this reform too late and nothing was achieved during the last legislature.
Ecolo is strongly in favour of the principle of this reform, but the model proposed by the outgoing government is not satisfactory.
In fact, the initiative is left to the hospitals and the staff assigned to the outpatient teams remain hospital staff.
For Ecolo, the systems set up in outpatient care must be autonomous from hospital institutions and there must be a mandatory progressive reconversion of hospital beds into new support and accommodation structures.
The work of recognizing mental health professions within the framework of public health has been underway for more than 10 years.
With the fall of the Government, the work undertaken by the Chamber during the last legislature could not be completed.
However, the challenges to be met in mental health are significant.
For Ecolo, it is time to bring this matter to a conclusion and to simultaneously recognise, within the framework of Royal Decree No. 78, clinical psychologists, sexologists, educational therapists and psychotherapists.
Regarding the latter, Ecolo remains very attentive to ensuring that access to training is as flexible as possible while demanding quality training and respect for the diversity of approaches.
Ensuring financial accessibility for patients
Grant Omnio status automatically and without any complex prior formalities
For Ecolo, anyone who is below the income ceiling giving access to the right to increased reimbursements should benefit from it automatically.
If a household's income falls below the ceiling, the insurance organization will automatically grant preferential Omnio status for a period of two years.
Ecolo also intends to make the system more flexible and more efficient.
If access to Omnio status is limited to a low income ceiling, thus targeting the poorest families, the result is, for example, that an unemployed person actively seeking work and finding at most a few months of temporary work, is penalised by losing access to this status and to the derived rights.
This is a real employment trap that we propose to mitigate by creating an Omnio system, more widely accessible, including to "poor" workers, and an Omnio + system, intended for families who live in the most severe situations of poverty.
Increase the reimbursement rate for general medicine for all insured persons
Ecolo proposes to increase the reimbursement of general practitioner consultations from 75 to 85% for ordinary insured persons and from 90 to 95 or 100% for persons with Omnio and Omnio + status.
Currently, many people in precarious situations prefer to go to the hospital rather than to the general practitioner, simply because the billing by the hospital is deferred and they do not have sufficient cash to pay for a consultation.
This leads to unnecessary expenses in terms of additional examinations and hospitalizations, and represents a cost for both health insurance and the patient and increases the risk of indebtedness61.
Facilitating the application of the third-party payment system in general medicine
The third-party payment system62 is currently prohibited in the context of visits to the doctor, except under certain conditions.
In order for the general practitioner to be able to apply it, there are heavy administrative formalities to complete.
Few general practitioners therefore agree to use this system.
This situation is likely to worsen in the coming years due to the reduction in the number of general practitioners, who will therefore have less and less time to devote to administrative tasks.
This is one of the factors that explains why the most vulnerable social classes are turning away from primary care.
Ecolo proposes to authorise without conditions, and to generalise the application of third-party payment for visits and consultations with general practitioners outside the hospital, within a simplified administrative framework, making it practicable for home visits and avoiding abuses (pricing of acts not provided, for example).
61 This phenomenon is confirmed by a recent study by the Mutualité chrétienne on health inequalities: the lowest socioeconomic class is in poorer health, goes less quickly to the general practitioner but suffers more hospitalizations. 62 This means that the provider invoices the service directly to the mutual insurance company and the patient may only pay their share.
Improve price transparency to limit unpleasant surprises
Following a legislative proposal by environmentalists, the Federal Parliament recently enshrined in law the obligation for all service providers to display in their waiting room whether or not they are contracted.
Ecolo wants to go further by requiring healthcare providers to display their prices for the most common services, in order to allow patients to know what to expect.
Reforming health policy decision-making systems
For Ecolo, health policies must be developed in consultation with stakeholders.
However, as mentioned above, the current system is based on policies that are strongly focused on hospitals and specialized care.
This care is obviously essential, but primary care is too often neglected.
Furthermore, it is clear that the weight of these various bodies makes it difficult to develop a genuine global health policy centred on the patient and primary care.
This situation can be explained in particular by the predominant representation of specialists and hospitals in the main consultation structures such as the mutual health commission.
This results in an impossibility of revaluing the intellectual act (general medicine or psychiatry for example), and of developing a balanced policy between the different lines of care.
The same problem exists for nurses: the National Nursing Council does not include any nurses who practice at home.
The recent reform of the Council only makes the situation worse since seats are guaranteed for specialist hospital nurses, without doing so for home nurses.
The main public health advisory body (CNEH) also only represents hospitals.
Ecolo therefore proposes to carry out an evaluation of the current system and the necessary rebalancing between the first and second lines of care.
It is also important that the final decision rests with the public authority, in optimal consultation with all stakeholders.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity Axis Disabled people
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Disabled people
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
A person with a disability, like any other member of society, recognizes, lives and presents himself through numerous qualifications among which the disability is most often neither the first nor the main characteristic.
Thus, the vast majority of people living with a disability share the wish to be able to participate in social, cultural and economic life, to the full extent of the abilities, intelligence, qualities and values ​​specific to each of them.
The main objective for Ecolo is therefore to give people with disabilities the maximum chance of inclusion.
This involves, in particular, having means of subsistence to compensate for the disability and the costs it represents, as well as the possibility of integrating as much as possible into living spaces that are not specifically protected, living spaces that we can share, with or without a disability.
Thus, if a specific policy for people with disabilities is essential, the inclusion, participation, reception, assistance and daily support of people with disabilities must be the subject of global and transversal consideration within the policies implemented.
The federated entities have many levers in terms of policy to assist people with disabilities.
This is the case for accessibility, day care, accommodation, employment in a sheltered environment, support in an open environment, specific assistance for employment and training as well as financial interventions in the acquisition or equipment of material which promotes autonomy in daily life.
The role of the federal state must be to facilitate the full inclusion of people with disabilities, but also to ensure compliance with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and, finally, to ensure that people with disabilities have a sufficient income.
Ecolo's proposals
Placing the disabled person at the centre of concerns
Implement the ratified United Nations Convention on Persons with Disabilities
Adopted on December 13, 2006 at the headquarters of the United Nations, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was ratified by Belgium in 2007.
For Ecolo, it is essential that all regulatory texts be brought into conformity and that the provisions of the said Convention be applied without further delay in order to ensure respect for the human rights of all persons with disabilities.
The evaluation by the monitoring committee planned for July 2011 will be a pivotal moment which should enable the policies implemented to be reoriented, where appropriate, in order to guarantee real social participation of people with disabilities.
Putting the administration at the service of people with disabilities
Too often, the recognition and definition of a disability involves long and multiple steps on the part of people with disabilities and their families.
Once a disability is recognised, Ecolo proposes that the reference general practitioner, who manages a single file, becomes the point of contact with the relevant administrations (INAMI, ONAFTS, AWIPH, PHARE Service, SPF Social Security).
In addition, the deadlines currently set for examining files are often significantly exceeded.
Paying late payment interest is a desirable but insufficient solution.
The centralization of medical records, combined with a reorganization of the medical expertise center, should make it possible to shorten these deadlines and make them coincide with legal provisions.
Finally, in order to facilitate all procedures, it is essential to simplify all administrative documents and texts available to the administration.
Still with a view to simplification, Ecolo proposes that requests for material aid, whether reimbursed by INAMI or federated entities, can be submitted via a single window.
Improving the provisional administration of property and the person to be protected
Ecolo has tabled a bill relating to the organisation of the protection of vulnerable people in matters of income and asset management, as well as in the context of decision-making acts, when the person's capacities do not allow them, or no longer allow them, to assume these tasks and their consequences.
The debates around this issue have finally allowed the democratic parties to agree on the importance of putting an end to the status of incapacitated person.
It is also necessary to carry out an assessment of the person's protection needs based on their abilities, to promote the involvement of the person's social and family network, to ensure the presence of a trusted person and, finally, to carry out a regular assessment of the always temporary arrangements, which can be extended, adapted or renewed.
Ecolo will ensure, in consultation with the stakeholders concerned by the problem, that these various provisions are implemented.
Ensure a decent income
Currently, household income is taken into consideration when determining the income replacement allowance.
The same applies to the allowance linked to loss or reduction of autonomy.
Ecolo proposes to guarantee the integration allowance63 independently of the spouse's income and to no longer consider it as income subject to taxation.
From the moment a person is necessarily dependent, they cannot be penalised by a system which links the payment of the integration allowance to household income.
63 The integration allowance aims to compensate for a loss or reduction in the degree of autonomy which requires the help of a third person or adapted equipment in a series of daily tasks.
The outgoing government has taken steps to raise the threshold before linking it to the spouse's income;
However, for Ecolo, this development remains insufficient.
A bill has therefore been tabled in the Federal Parliament to remove any reference to an income ceiling.
Beyond that, Ecolo wants to go further.
Whether or not they are people with disabilities, individualisation of rights is essential, including for income replacement benefits.
Furthermore, income replacement benefits must be assimilated in their methods of calculation and granting to unemployment benefits, so as to immediately replace professional income.
Today, waiting times following changes in people's circumstances, beyond the six months during which they retain their rights, are such that beneficiaries sometimes find themselves in great financial difficulty, or even in the CPAS.
As difficulties never come alone, such a situation often results in the cessation of home help and medication.
The amount of the allowance must also be able, where appropriate, to be adapted without delay according to the development of the disabled person's activity, whether the latter resumes an activity after a total or partial interruption, or whether he or she interrupts or reduces his or her activity due to the development of his or her disability.
Finally, disabled people, like many people dependent on replacement income, are increasingly forced to live in precarious conditions, with incomes often below the poverty line.
Ecolo has therefore also tabled a bill aimed at raising all social benefits, including replacement benefits, above the poverty threshold64.
Ensuring accessibility for people with disabilities
Several levels of authority share the skills required to make public places and spaces safely accessible to people with reduced mobility, as well as to people with sensory or mental disabilities.
The federal state has limited accessibility obligations to the notion of reasonable accommodation: an evaluation of this option is necessary because this restriction is often used to justify the non-accommodation of public buildings.
As a result, federal public services are not always accessible and complaints are filed with the Centre for Equal Opportunities.
Accessibility is the obligatory gateway to social participation.
For Ecolo, it is imperative that, within the framework of its powers, the federal state commits to:
make federal public services accessible to people with reduced mobility and also to people with intellectual disabilities or sensory disabilities;
ocontinue work with SNCB to make the railway effectively accessible to all;
o ensure that post points comply with the same accessibility criteria as post offices;
ensure access to emergency numbers by SMS for deaf and hard of hearing people;
to label anysurfer federal websites.
Promoting access to employment for people with disabilities
Ecolo wants to enable people with disabilities who wish to do so to work.
To this end, we propose, within the framework of federal competences:
to enforce the objectives of including disabled workers in the civil service through an action plan for employment which should quickly lead to compliance with these quotas;
In any case, it is up to public services to set an example;
to conduct an incentive policy with private employers (positive hiring actions), in particular by providing them with all useful information concerning the possibilities of including people with disabilities;
to ensure that the workplace is designed in a way that is suitable for the person hired;
to integrate the issues of inclusion of people with disabilities into management training and other training organized for the middle classes;
to put an end to the “competition” between the allowance and the salary and to eliminate the delays in transition between active and inactive situations;
it is necessary to avoid the situation where accepting a job does not automatically lead to the loss of social benefits (allowances, compensation, social housing, etc.) and to overcome the difficulty of regaining these rights in the event of an interruption of professional activity;
to continue and strengthen cultural and information work aimed at employers so that disabled people with the intellectual and/or physical capacities for employment can apply on an equal footing with other candidates, without being discriminated against or excluded a priori;
It is important to remove prejudices and to make known the assistance available, but also to make known and promote the experience and the often positive experiences of business leaders who have already hired disabled people;
to encourage, in a cross-cutting manner, within the federal government and within the federated entities, a reflection on the difficulties that people with disabilities must overcome before having access to employment (assistance from a third party, mobility, etc.) and in order to keep it (participation in economic and social life).
Furthermore, the unemployment activation plan particularly targets people with disabilities, which often forces people to prove their disability and leads to unacceptable situations.
Ecolo is also firmly opposed to the measures envisaged by the outgoing Minister of Employment, aimed at automatically excluding people with disabilities from unemployment benefits.
Administrations, unemployment services and professional integration services for people with disabilities must obviously collaborate, but no general service can exclude citizens from their right to benefit from them.
Supporting people with severe dependency and their loved ones
Support and give real status to close caregivers
Despite the announcements contained in the 2007 government agreement, no measures have been taken to support the role of informal carers and to make their living conditions acceptable, whether in terms of income, time, access to information or places for discussion.
For many families, keeping a highly dependent disabled person at home (by personal choice or due to a lack of places) results in a reduction in income, often due to the significant or even continuous availability required of a family member.
When a loved one chooses to accompany and assist, even for a short period of time, a parent or child, a series of serious consequences follow: lack of recognition, exit from the work protection system and loss of rights.
Regardless of the need to make external home assistance more accessible materially and financially, real recognition must be given to the family carer and their role.
For Ecolo, companions must not only be supported in their choice but also continue to benefit from their rights.
This involves in particular:
the valuation of the period of life devoted to assisting a relative in the calculation of the pension;
the granting of tax benefits to family caregivers;
the maintenance of the worker’s social rights over time;
o support for employers who take into account the situation of these carers and help them to combine family life and professional life;
mutual aid and psychological support for couples of parents put under severe strain in these situations, for brothers and sisters, families and loved ones;
the provision of places and times of respite;
o public support for mutual aid associations for their support work and their recognition as field associations formulating recommendations to public authorities;
o special support for associations and services organizing support (training, places for speaking, etc.) for “natural caregivers”;
the integration of this framework into the more global approach to autonomy insurance that Ecolo proposes to establish at the federal level, the family carer being able, moreover, to be supported or relayed by a professional carer.
Developing autonomy insurance
Ecolo proposes the establishment of autonomy insurance which must, as a priority, constitute a new pillar of federal social security and benefit all people who, temporarily or permanently, suffer a loss of autonomy.
Ecolo is therefore proposing a coordinated plan for the autonomy of people involving in a concerted and coherent manner, that is to say complementary and jointly, the federal State, the Communities and the Regions, with a view to guaranteeing that people with a deficit or loss of autonomy have access to a range of adapted and quality services and aids.
This access must be made, as far as possible, according to the principle of free choice of service providers, in order to respect the autonomy and freedom of the person and therefore their privacy.
Organize essential consultation between INAMI and the federated entities
Ecolo wants to strengthen INAMI's interventions with highly dependent people through specific agreements.
It is also appropriate for INAMI to develop joint initiatives with the federated entities for people with disabilities and psychiatric disorders, so that they can remain in their living environment.
Assistance in the living environment (outpatient teams, personalized agreements, etc.) is also less expensive than hospital stays.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Housing Solidarity Axis
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Accommodation
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
The Constitution proclaims, in its article 23, the right of all to decent housing.
This constitutional recognition places the right to housing among the fundamental rights and freedoms that it is up to the public authorities to implement.
Although the powers in this area fall mainly to the Regions65, the fact remains that certain aspects of the issue remain within the remit of the federal government and constitute important levers for action:
This mainly concerns matters relating to the Civil Code and part of real estate taxation.
Unfortunately, the outgoing government has remained relatively inactive and some of the new provisions have not even been effectively implemented (mandatory display of the rent amount, new rules on rental guarantees).
The right of everyone to have affordable housing is undoubtedly the major concern in terms of housing.
However, both economic factors (the upward trend in rents, the increase in purchase prices, the increase in the cost of energy, the general socio-economic context) and social or sociological factors (the impoverishment of a part of the population, the reduction in the average size of households, the population explosion in certain cities, the change in the composition of families) have a structural influence on the real estate market in such a way that they force a growing number of households to devote an increasingly large part of their means to housing.
This observation is particularly true on the rental market due to a lack of regulation of the private market and the glaring deficit in low-rent housing (social, public or subsidized private housing).
Furthermore, property taxation as it prevails today in Belgium remains unfair and takes too little account of ecological issues.
Within the framework of federal powers in the area of ​​housing, Ecolo focuses its housing priorities on regulating the private rental market, increasing the stock of moderately priced housing for households with precarious, modest or average incomes, as well as adapting property taxation with a view to making it more socially equitable and ecologically more efficient.
65 To learn about our proposals regarding housing falling under regional competence, see the 2009 Ecolo Programme, Book II, For a Solidarity Society, Housing.
Ecolo's proposals
Regulate the private rental market
While housing is an economic investment for some, it is first and foremost a basic necessity for the entire population, which sometimes involves contradictory demands to which public authorities must respond with balanced arbitration.
Regulate rents
Currently, the amount of rent is set freely, based on the law of supply and demand, with the price constituting the adjustment value.
Ecolo proposes that a mechanism for controlling rents be put in place, in collaboration with the Regions.
This mechanism will have to be based on the determination, by a rental observatory designated by the public authorities, of reference rents defined on the basis of objective criteria (number of rooms, surface area, location, condition of the accommodation, existence of a private garden).
This reference rent scale will enable the owner and the tenant to be informed as to the rent that it is reasonable to establish for a given accommodation.
The public authorities will also be able to encourage owners to comply with the reference scale, by providing for a tax modulation depending on whether the price requested is close or not to the reference rent.
Generalize joint rental committees
Ecolo wants the organization of joint rental committees to be generalized throughout the territory within the framework of the law of February 21, 2005 modifying the Judicial Code with regard to mediation.
Indeed, free recourse prior to any legal request to a joint mediation body has largely proven its worth, particularly in matters of conflicts relating to employment law and as also illustrated by the pilot experiments carried out in Antwerp, Brussels and Charleroi.
It is always preferable to avoid lengthy and costly legal proceedings and to work out amicable solutions.
This joint body will be able to assess, in particular, whether a rent demanded is not manifestly unreasonable, in which case it would be authorized to set a “fair” rent.
Create a federal rental guarantee fund
For households with precarious or modest incomes for whom managing to pay their rent is already a challenge, setting up a rental deposit is simply impossible and too often ends up permanently blocking their access to decent housing.
Legislative provisions have recently been adopted to reduce this burden on the tenant, but the reluctance of private banks and the lack of resources of the CPAS supposed to take part in the mechanism suggest that an alternative solution must be considered.
Ecolo proposes the creation of a federal rental guarantee fund to provide relief to the most disadvantaged households.
The guarantees would be pooled in a fund managed by the public authorities.
A portion of the interest generated would be returned to tenants at the end of the lease, with the surplus being allocated to financing various services that benefit tenants and owners.
The priority would be to pre-finance the constitution of the rental guarantee for the most deprived who would benefit from a period of 36 months to reimburse it to the fund.
Establish a rent allowance
The aim of the rental allowance is to provide occasional assistance to households who cannot afford the cost of rent.
This allowance would be granted to households who benefit from integration income and are waiting for social, public or subsidized private housing.
Ecolo recommends entrusting the CPAS with the mission of granting a capped monthly rental allowance, paid primarily to large households and which would cover all or part of the difference between the social rent and the objective average rent.
This rental allowance must be regulated to bear fruit and avoid speculative effects.
In particular, it is necessary that:
In a complementary manner, a mechanism could link the implementation of this system to rent control;
otherwise, since the supply is not very elastic, the owner takes full advantage of the aid;
the implementation of the rental allowance is linked to the improvement of the average quality of the properties put up for rental.
Develop a standard lease for a primary residence
The establishment of a standard lease for a principal residence drawn up by a joint rental committee and certified by the public authorities aims to reduce the number of disputes through better dissemination of information on the rights and obligations of each party.
In fact, some leases contain illegal clauses and provide very little information about existing mandatory rules (for example, some leases provide for a rental deposit in cash and exceeding three months, notice periods for personal occupation that are too short, etc.).
Initially, the use of this lease type will be optional.
Ensure smoothing of short-term leases
For short-term leases of less than or equal to 3 years, rules exist to limit rent increases between two lease contracts66.
However, these provisions are poorly known and, in practice, rarely applied.
Ecolo therefore proposes to make them better known, in particular by including them in the mandatory annex to the lease contract, to facilitate consultation at registration offices of previous lease contracts and, finally, to extend the application of the mechanism to cases where it is the lessee who has terminated the lease.
Ecolo finally proposes that these measures be quickly evaluated in order to modify them, if necessary, if they prove not to be effective.
Implement the “sliding” lease mechanism
The aim of the mechanism is to reconcile two parties who would have an a priori distrust of each other - the precarious tenant and the owner - by allowing the former to overcome the difficulties linked to moving into new accommodation and the latter to be supported at the start of the rental contract.
In concrete terms, the owner initially rents the property to a third-party association which itself makes it available to the tenant and provides them with social support.
If, at the end of a 6-month trial period, no problems are found, the lease then “slides” to the tenant.
66 The lessor may only extend the contract once and under the same conditions. Furthermore, if the lessor terminates successive short-term leases concluded each time with different tenants, the rent of these leases cannot, for a period of nine years, be higher than the initial rent (i.e. the rent of the first contract), excluding indexation and revision which are always admissible.
Allow people living in group or solidarity housing to keep their benefits at the single rate
Under current legislation, people living in group or solidarity housing are considered, for the allocation of unemployment benefits, integration income, pensions or even allowances for disabled people, as cohabitants.
This situation implies a considerable reduction in the resources of these already vulnerable people, while it is appropriate to support them and not penalize them further.
As a result, Ecolo proposes that people living in this type of accommodation should no longer be considered as cohabitants and should be able to keep their benefits at the single rate.
Protecting tenants from arbitrary evictions
The phenomenon of illegal evictions constitutes a real scourge and neither the law of 30 November 1998 aimed at humanising evictions, nor the compulsory conciliation procedure before the justice of the peace have provided a satisfactory overall solution to this problem.
Several concomitant actions must be taken.
First of all, it is worth noting that there is a considerable lack of information on the subject.
Ecolo therefore proposes to collect and centralise data relating to judicial evictions and evictions decided by mayors for reasons of insalubrity and to organise the information of the CPAS in an optimal manner at the different stages of the procedure.
Furthermore, Ecolo wishes to allow the tenant, victim of an unlawful eviction, to bring an action for cessation, accompanied by a penalty payment, in order, if necessary, to be able to reintroduce the tenant to the premises in the short term.
Calculate tax based on actual rent and no longer on cadastral income
At present, the owner of a rented property is taxed on the basis of the cadastral income, that is to say, a theoretical amount fixed in 1980 based on rents in effect in 1975.
An equalization (revaluation) of cadastral income should have been carried out every five years but none ever took place.
At most, this income has been indexed every year since 1991 and multiplied by a corrective coefficient in the case of rental.
This flat-rate tax system is unfair because it corresponds to a completely obsolete reality, which could lead to modest homes in deprived areas being taxed more than villas located in an idyllic environment.
This system is also unfair to owners who maintain their property since the property is taxed equally whether it is maintained or not.
Worse, it can also encourage the excessive division of assets and does not encourage moderation in determining the rent (whether the rent is high or reasonable, the taxable base is the same) or the improvement of the quality of the assets (whether or not improvement work is carried out, the deduction for charges is the same).
Ecolo therefore proposes to reform this system to make it fairer, and to calculate the contribution, no longer on the basis of cadastral income, but from the rents actually received, after deduction of the charges actually incurred by the owner and considering that the owner-occupier is obviously not concerned.
Some owners will therefore pay more and others less, based on their actual income and no longer on a theoretical situation within the framework of overall budgetary neutrality.
Of course, the implementation of such a system by the federal state assumes that the tax authorities are aware of the rents requested by the owners.
The registration of leases should make it possible to obtain this information.
However, although this formality is free, it is clear that a significant number of people do not fulfil their obligations.
Consequently, Ecolo suggests that both the owner and the tenant should be required to specify the amount of rent paid in their tax return.
Increase the number of affordable housing units for households with precarious, modest or average incomes
Traditionally, modern societies have set up social housing stock to enable less well-off tenants to find accommodation at a reasonable price.
Belgium is lagging behind in this area since the European average rate of social housing in relation to the total housing stock is 17.3%, while in our country it is only 7%.
Other solutions aimed at putting low-rent housing on the rental market – whether public housing (belonging to municipalities, CPAS, housing funds) or subsidised private housing (AIS housing, housing under public management) – have also been developed.
Assistance for the purchase of family housing for people with limited incomes has also been introduced (low-interest loans, subsidies for the creation of average housing).
Finally, territorial urban renewal policies have been implemented to improve the quality of housing in certain impoverished neighborhoods.
While it is true that most of the levers in this area fall under the regional authorities, it should be noted that the federal government has the capacity to intervene by reducing its taxation in order to increase the production and renovation of affordable housing.
Reduce VAT to 6% and 12% on housing provided under social policy
The federal government is responsible for value added tax and must comply with European regulations on this matter.
This allows a reduced VAT rate to be applied to a limited list of cases which are considered to be essential goods and services.
The categories of goods and services that may be subject to a reduced VAT rate include: the delivery, construction, renovation and transformation of housing provided within the framework of social policy.
It is up to the Member States themselves to define what the concept of "social policy" for housing is supposed to cover67.
A reduced VAT rate already exists in Belgium for social housing in the strict sense.
We therefore wish to reduce VAT to 6% when it concerns public or subsidised private housing offered for sale or rental, at a moderate price, to households with precarious and modest incomes and to increase it to 12% when it concerns housing allocated to households with average incomes.
Exempt the taxpayer from the increase in cadastral income in the event that his property is taken over by an A.I.S.
When an owner gives his property for management to a social real estate agency (A.I.S.) which rents it to a low-income household, this has for the moment no influence on the increase in cadastral income within the framework of personal income tax: as for any rental, this is multiplied by a coefficient of 1.40.
Therefore, pending the reform of cadastral income, Ecolo proposes to exempt the taxpayer from this increase, in order to increase the number of housing units managed by the A.I.S.
67 To comply with the European standard, the national standard must impose certain application criteria relating to the allocation or accessibility of the housing in question: it must be allocated according to criteria defined by the public authorities and not by the market and/or be accessible through a mechanism for moderating rents or prices.
Reorienting tax measures to strengthen their fairness and ecological impact
In 2005, out of 6 million tax returns, 47% benefited from tax deductions linked to the repayment of mortgage loans, at a cost of €2 billion per year, or approximately three times the total expenditure devoted to housing policy in the Regions.
These deductions do not currently take into account any sustainability criteria.
They also benefit households with precarious or modest incomes very little68.
Furthermore, owner-occupied housing benefits from greater aid than investment property, which is logical but does not sufficiently take into account the need to develop the supply on the rental market for households with precarious, modest or average incomes.
Of course, Ecolo intends to encourage access to property.
However, this incentive is not incompatible with the development of more supportive and sustainable policies.
Ecolo therefore wishes to strengthen the modulation of the system in order to direct resources more towards access to housing and sustainable development.
Ecolo therefore wants this aid to be more targeted on the basis of ecological criteria.
Currently, too much of the tax assistance concerns housing located outside of residential areas.
However, we know the harmful effects linked to urban sprawl and rural fragmentation, particularly in terms of energy expenditure and mobility.
Consequently, Ecolo proposes to modulate the admissible deductions according to criteria linked to the territory, in order to further encourage investment in urban or rural housing areas.
Ecolo also proposes to increase the possibilities of deductions when mortgage loans are intended for the acquisition, construction or renovation of high energy performance housing.
Finally, Ecolo proposes to modulate tax aid in order to strengthen it for households that need it most, but also for investment properties that are inhabited by households with precarious, modest or average incomes and rented for a moderate rent.
Reduce VAT on green building materials
Numerous scientific studies have shown that indoor pollution is often more significant than outdoor pollution and that it is largely due to the use of polluting, even toxic, construction and renovation materials.
Such products are not without consequences for health and can be the cause of neurological, skin or respiratory diseases as well as a considerable number of allergies, both for occupants of homes and for workers working on construction sites.
It is therefore necessary to promote the use of construction materials labelled for their environmental qualities.
Ecolo proposes to reduce VAT on such materials from 21% to 6%.
68 As an illustration, for the year 2005, 6.2% of the first income decile of the population (the poorest 10%) had recourse to such deductions while 53% of the last decile (the richest 10%) benefited from them.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Employment and Solidarity Axis Public Finances
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Public finances
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
The deterioration of our public finances has become more pronounced in recent years despite years of economic boom between 2003 and 2007 and a continuous reduction in interest charges on the debt.
In 2008 and 2009, the deficit widened by a further 5.7% of GDP.
Structural factors, such as the global crisis, alone explain a widening of the deficit by 2.6% of GDP, or just under half of the deterioration.
It is therefore false to assert, as the partners of the outgoing Government do, that the deterioration of our public finances is almost exclusively due to the crisis.
The deterioration is mainly localized at the federal level, more affected by the fall in tax revenues and the rise in social spending.
Furthermore, the snowball effect (runaway debt) started again in 2009.
Public debt has thus once again exceeded the threshold of 100% of GDP.
This situation is worrying.
Although Belgian public finances were gradually restored until 2002, they were then marked by a structural deterioration, even more so from 2007, with an acceleration following the financial crisis of 2009.
If the course is not changed quickly, this deterioration is likely to jeopardize the future financing of community services (social security, justice, etc.).
To effectively play their role in regulating the economy, to implement their political choices, to implement redistribution policies, to ensure quality collective services, and to face the challenges linked to the increase in life expectancy, public authorities must have sufficient resources.
This requires a clear improvement in the way public finances are managed and a return to a balanced budget in the medium term.
Without this more responsible policy, less focused on the short term, an agenda of social regression, including the drying up of federated entities, risks being imposed.
For Ecolo, this perspective is unsustainable.
It is therefore appropriate to gradually begin a budgetary recovery, while taking care, of course, not to jeopardise the way out of the crisis and to avoid the population paying for the crisis a second time.
Wealth is abundant in our country;
it is appropriate that they be better redistributed.
Our priorities in terms of public finances are therefore to initiate structural debt reduction by managing finances more responsibly, improving tax yields while making taxation fairer and greener.
Ecolo's proposals
Ensuring healthy public finances through more responsible management
Structural debt reduction by the State is a long-term necessity to ensure, particularly in the context of the challenges linked to longer life expectancies, the maintenance of efficient community services that are accessible to everyone.
In this light, the budgetary trajectories proposed at the beginning of 2010 by the High Council of Finance and aiming for a return to budgetary balance for Belgium by 2015 seem reasonable to us but will naturally have to be evaluated in the light of changes in the economic context.
To respect this trajectory and gradually regain balance, it is first necessary to stop the plundering of State assets for the sole purpose of (fictitious) budgetary balance in the short term.
Any decision regarding the sale of a state-owned asset must take into account a long-term perspective.
It must include the costs involved in such a sale for future years and not just the direct income.
The sale of the asset should only be possible if the direct benefits exceed the future costs, which has not been the case for the operations carried out in recent years.
In this context, Ecolo recommends a revision of the accounting plan of the Buildings Agency which, in its current state, does not allow a correct assessment of the value of the buildings whose management has been entrusted to the State.
This state of affairs not only prevents effective control of the accounts, but also hinders any informed decision-making concerning the management of the Régie's building stock, particularly when it comes to making significant investments to be amortized over several years, which is too often prevented by the logic of budgetary annuity.
Furthermore, it is irresponsible to try to disguise the accounts by using communicating vessels, by defunding certain public sectors to approach a short-term balance of the general budget but at the same time weakening a collective service in which the State has disinvested.
The resale in 2006 by the liberal-socialist government of half of the Post Office for €300 million to a private consortium is a perfect example, as are the Sale & Lease back operations.
The budget should be as transparent as possible.
In this spirit, Ecolo believes that debudgeting techniques must be reserved for the targeted financing of investments whose public interest is clear and a priority and can only be used under the control of Parliament (with the support of the Court of Auditors) and with the greatest transparency.
Furthermore, the federal state cannot penalize the federated entities for achieving the budgetary objectives assigned to it.
The systematic recourse, outside of the agreements concluded on multi-annual budgetary trajectories, to Communities and Regions to correct the non-compliance with its budgetary objectives, must end.
Finally, a guarantee of healthy public finances at the Belgian level also requires sufficient financing of the various entities.
However, at present, the Brussels Region remains underfunded in terms of the specific charges incumbent upon it given its role as a multi-capital, the provision of numerous services to citizens living outside the Region and not contributing to its budget, and its more delicate socio-demographic situation.
It is therefore appropriate to implement structural refinancing of this Region.
Improve tax yield
Strengthening the action of the tax administration
For Ecolo, it is crucial to strengthen the Federal Public Service (FPS) Finance which, while being constantly under pressure, has been left to fend for itself in terms of investments under the authority of the current Minister of Finance:
the number of commitments only timidly reaches 60% of natural departures;
computer equipment is insufficient and outdated;
the need for training and retraining is immense;
Regional offices are closing in droves.
Ecolo is therefore proposing to reinvest in human resources (1,000 additional jobs) and materials in the financial administration services.
Better collection of taxes due is first and foremost an obligation incumbent on public authorities to ensure equality between citizens.
Fight against tax fraud
The investments wanted by Ecolo should allow the FPS Finances to concentrate its efforts on the fight against tax fraud and evasion which, each year, cost the State and therefore Belgian taxpayers billions of euros, and which are a source of inequality between citizens.
Ecolo has obtained the establishment of a parliamentary commission of inquiry responsible for examining major tax fraud cases, but the 108 recommendations that the commission has reached are unfortunately still awaiting implementation and have been confronted with the inertia of the outgoing government on this subject.
In particular, Ecolo recommends that additional resources be made available to the Special Tax Inspectorate (ISI), a particularly effective body.
Ecolo also proposes broadening the powers of certain ISI officials who could themselves observe criminal tax offences and which, by definition, are directly linked to money laundering operations.
They would receive the status of judicial police officer, with the specific purpose of collecting the necessary information.
The substitutes of the King's Prosecutor, specialized in tax matters, would constitute their privileged interlocutors.
As our legislation currently stands, these matters must be handled by third parties, resulting in losses of time and efficiency.
Not to mention the recurring lack of staff and resources available in this sector.
By taking this operational measure, coupled with an adequate training offer, the investigations into these cases of serious and organised tax fraud would move from the administrative level to the judicial level, thus allowing more efficient investigative measures to be taken.
Ecolo also proposes to increase cooperation agreements with the tax administrations of other countries.
It is thanks to the existence of this type of agreement with France that the tax authorities were able, for example, to note that out of 29,000 Belgians with a second residence in France, only 12,000 had declared it.
Moreover, signing such agreements is not enough;
They also need to be implemented.
In the above example, the activation of the agreement was unfortunately not immediate but required a long period of pressure69.
Ecolo also proposes to implement anti-abuse measures which would make it possible to tax profits relocated "artificially", particularly to tax havens.
It will first be necessary to amend the current list of tax havens in order to extend it to all tax havens included in the OECD list.
Ecolo recommends prohibiting any Belgian financial institution from carrying out any financial transaction to and from the listed tax havens and, in the meantime, taxing financial flows with tax havens.
The Belgian government must ask other members of the European Union to do the same.
69 Draft law aimed at lifting banking secrecy in the context of national and international operations, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/2304/52K2304001.pdf.
It will also be necessary to develop legislative tools to enable an effective fight against money laundering.
The fight against tax fraud is obviously not limited to Belgium, but must also cover fraud and economic crime at the international level70.
In this context, Ecolo proposes to establish international public control over financial clearing and rooting companies, to dismantle tax havens to prevent capital flight and tax competition between States and to make the International Criminal Court competent for major economic crimes.
Alongside these various proposals, Ecolo intends to put an end to tax amnesty policies.
It seems inconceivable to announce, on the one hand, a desire to fight tax fraud effectively and, on the other hand, to carry out repeated tax amnesty operations71.
Thoroughly review the notional interest system72
From the outset, Ecolo has been very critical of the notional interest system.
It is clear that, to date, nothing has contradicted these arguments and that, on the contrary, some people seem to increasingly regret their blindness in favour of this system.
In certain circumstances, the system can have a positive effect of strengthening equity and attracting investors, but most often, these are tax gifts not justified by real economic added value and/or by the creation/maintenance of employment, with a very high public cost.
Ecolo has tabled a bill aimed at correcting and regulating this system with a series of guidelines that will both counter abuses, link the advantages to job creation or business development, provide greater support for innovative sectors, introduce selectivity for those who really need it (mainly SMEs) and, in doing so, remove this advantage for companies that are only hoarding73.
All the changes proposed by the Greens will make it possible to regain significant budgetary margins (at least €1 billion) for solidarity and sustainable development policies.
Introduce a tax on large assets
Ecolo proposes to fight against "tax shopping" which makes Belgium a tax haven, particularly for French rentiers wanting to avoid wealth tax or capital gains tax, but also for certain foreign investors who want to benefit from notional interest, without bringing any added value to our country.
In this sense, Ecolo intends to introduce in Belgium a tax on the largest assets, such as exists in neighbouring countries.
This tax would only target the largest assets, i.e. those worth more than €1 million, while exempting residential homes up to a maximum amount of €150,000 per inhabitant, work tools, as well as cultural or ecological assets.
It could also be modulated according to the nature of the taxable assets (thus, real estate would be taxed less than purely financial assets).
To be in line with the average rates applied by many European countries, its rate would be progressive up to 1%, so that, even for large assets, it would remain fairly marginal while bringing in significant revenue to the State, in particular allowing a reduction in the tax rates for low and medium incomes.
The implementation of such a tax would go hand in hand with the end of the fiscal use of individual banking secrecy74 or would be achieved via a withholding tax by the banks.
70 Draft law aimed at combating international tax fraud and tax havens, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/1669/52K1669001.pdf. 71 Bill to reform the permanent tax regularization system, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/2361/52K2361001.pdf. 72 See on this subject our proposal developed in the chapter “Regulation” of the 2010 programmatic platform. 73 Proposed law aimed at combating the abuse of notional interests, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/1024/52K1024001.pdf. 74 Bill to abolish banking secrecy, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/2216/52K2216001.pdf.
In the same spirit, Ecolo proposes to put stock market capital gains into contribution and to tax speculative stock market operations75.
These various measures are also part of the desire to make our tax system fairer by making all income (and not just income from work) contribute to the financing of collective services76.
Making taxation greener and fairer
Ecolo proposes to operate a partial tax transfer from the levy on work to polluting behavior.
Ecological taxation makes it possible to reorient the structure of levies towards a form more favourable to collective well-being, employment and environmental protection, while naturally providing compensation to neutralise the social impact of the measures.
Too often, tax reforms, whether they lead to an increase or a decrease in revenue, are not geared towards serving a particular political project.
Some people one day propose a tax reduction to flatter their electorate;
The next day, the same people are forced to adopt new savings measures or seek additional revenue to reduce the budget deficit caused by the previous tax reform.
Ecolo proposes to act based on a more global and more coherent vision.
Optimizing the impact of environmental taxation
For Ecolo, taxation, and in particular environmental taxation, is a means of redirecting decisions towards more environmentally friendly choices, much more than a means (which is also too often too unsocial) of replenishing the general State budget.
This is the reason why, beyond the general application of the "polluter pays" principle, Ecolo favours the "incentive" aspect of this specific taxation, which should only be implemented if there are practical and more ecological alternatives to the products or behaviours targeted.
Despite the interest in deploying such tools, also in terms of stimulating innovation and the research that leads to it and by means of the possibility for low and middle income households to neutralize its impact,
We must note that at present, the share of environmental taxation in all tax levies remains, in Belgium, below what is practiced in many European countries.
Ensure the immediacy of the tax advantage relating to investments in energy savings
Certain works (insulation, heating, solar panels) are eligible for tax reductions and/or tax deductions.
The method of collecting tax in Belgium results in a fairly long period (one and a half years on average) between the time when the expense is incurred and the time when the taxpayer benefits from the advantage.
This time lapse tends to transform this tax advantage into a "windfall" to the extent that one must first have the capacity to consent to the expense before being reimbursed for it long afterwards.
Ecolo therefore proposes to ensure the immediacy of this advantage in order to help low- and middle-income households to also make these investments.
Tax reductions must also be accessible to everyone regardless of their income, so we want to transform them into tax credits77.
75 Draft law aimed at optimizing the tax on stock market transactions, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/2308/52K2308001.pdf. 76 See on this subject our proposals in the “Regulation” chapter of the 2010 programmatic platform. 77 Proposed law transforming the tax reduction for expenditure made to save energy into a tax credit, http://www.lachambre.be/FLWB/PDF/52/1071/52K1071001.pdf.
Rebalancing taxation in favor of earned income
Ecolo proposes to rebalance taxation in favor of earned income through fairer tax consideration of assets, other income, benefits and even privileges.
It is clear that the levies (taxes and contributions) which weigh on earned income remain high.
One of the reasons for the weight of these levies is lower, or sometimes even non-existent, taxation on other income (for example, certain capital gains) or other tax bases (for example, assets).
This is why it is necessary to rebalance taxation in favour of earned income and therefore seek a fairer contribution from other income and assets, for example via a tax on capital gains on shares, a tax on large assets, the replacement of the tax regime relating to stock options.
Making the tax system fairer and more united
Ecolo intends to strengthen the fairness and solidarity of our tax system.
In this sense, Ecolo wants the wealthiest people to contribute more widely to the financing of the public services from which they benefit.
On the other hand, such a reform would represent a tax saving for a large proportion of taxpayers.
Among other options, Ecolo proposes to review the personal income tax rate upwards for income brackets above €100,000.
Ecolo also proposes to generalize the application of a fixed reduction rate to all tax reductions and deductible expenses, in order to simplify their readability and avoid reverse redistribution, to strengthen the modulation of incentives according to environmental criteria and to reduce windfall effects.
Finally, more broadly, Ecolo proposes to eliminate flat-rate taxes and replace them with a contribution taking into account the contributory capacity and/or the polluting load.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Environment Energy Climate Axis
Environment Axis
Energy Climate
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Our society is facing a major dual challenge in terms of energy and climate: combating climate change caused by human activity and preparing for the reduction in the production of oil, then gas and uranium and, in the longer term, coal.
To ensure social equity, the improvement of living conditions, health and the environment and to avoid conflicts due to the scarcity of resources, it is essential to address these two challenges simultaneously without further delay.
For Ecolo, this is a central and decisive political emergency.
On the one hand, it is during the coming decade that major international measures must be taken to limit global warming to a maximum of 2°C, the objective adopted by the European Union.
To achieve this, according to the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), reductions of at least 40% in greenhouse gas emissions from industrialized countries are necessary between 1990 and 2020.
For environmentalists, it would be both unfair and unrealistic not to adopt the objective of an equal sharing of resources in the long term on a global scale.
It is therefore essential that both industrialised countries and emerging countries show solidarity and become actively involved in ambitious international negotiations that will truly lead to a reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions.
Belgium will have to ensure that the points not finalised in Copenhagen are put back on the agenda (follow-up to Kyoto, financial mechanisms to put an end to deforestation, reform of flexibility mechanisms (revision of the principle of "Clean Development Mechanisms" (CDM), sectoral mechanisms, etc.), particularly during the Belgian Presidency of the European Union.
It will also have to ensure that particular attention is paid to populations in the South who are already suffering from climate change.
On the other hand, the considerable increases and variations in the price of oil and gas products clearly demonstrate the growing tensions between supply and demand for energy.
These tensions can only increase as production is reduced, affecting fossil and fissile fuels.
Socially, this translates into an increasingly large share of our income being devoted to energy;
Low-income households are therefore particularly affected, which is unacceptable and must lead the public authorities to react.
To achieve this, the measures to be put in place must enable households, businesses and communities to reduce their energy bills, taking into account the means available to each.
These proactive policies will aim to make ecological choices less expensive, will focus primarily on techniques and methods contributing to increasing energy efficiency and will be accompanied by a broad development of renewable energies.
All of these measures also constitute an opportunity for sustainable economic development78.
This integrated vision of the environmental, social and economic issues of energy policy and the fight against climate change is at the heart of the environmentalists' programme.
Ecolo's proposals
Enabling everyone to access energy savings
Controlling consumption by facilitating investments
In order to control energy demand, improving energy efficiency is fundamental.
Often quick to implement, generally cost-effective, it allows us to sustainably reduce our consumption and reduce our dependence on international energy markets.
While initial energy savings are easy to achieve, such as unplugging electrical appliances when not in use or using energy-saving light bulbs, the most significant energy reductions require investments, work and changes in habits, the accessibility of which may be limited, among other things, by the financial means available.
In addition, more demanding product standards, including in terms of energy, will be required in order to guide investments sustainably.
Ecolo wants to free up the resources needed to finance these investments, by rationalising and regrouping the various existing 'energy' funds at the federal level, but also by recovering the undue profits from nuclear and coal-fired power stations (see below).
Ecolo finally proposes to tax kerosene, a polluting fuel which is currently totally exempt, against all logic.
To facilitate investments, particularly in insulation and including for rented housing, Ecolo also proposes that the federal state can support regional policies within the framework of a Public Household Partnership (PPM).
After a free audit, a public company allows the financing of priority works by an advance on premiums and a zero-rate loan.
Public buildings and offices will have to meet exemplary standards and undergo massive investment to increase their energy efficiency and reduce local authority bills.
In this regard, the Buildings Agency will ensure that buildings are made available to the federal authorities and their services that meet specifications requiring a limitation of impacts on the environment.
Ecolo thus intends to create thousands of jobs, notably through the employment-environment alliances launched at the regional level.
Finally, Ecolo would like to see stronger communication and awareness programs on simple actions that save energy79.
Ensuring better access to energy
Ecolo proposes the introduction of progressive pricing80 in the residential sector, first for electricity and then for other energy sources, in order to stimulate rational use of energy and to favour the most conscientious consumers.
Of course, accompanying measures will be taken in parallel to help consumers save energy and reduce the cost of their bills, particularly for low-income households and large consumers.
78 See the chapter “Ecological transition of the economy” of the 2010 programmatic platform. 79 Without prejudice to regional competence in the area of ​​rational use of energy (URE). 80 The final cost paid by the consumer would thus correspond to actual consumption (with different price bands).
In addition, Ecolo intends to better control energy prices.
This involves strengthening the powers of the federal regulator of electricity and gas markets, the CREG (Electricity and Gas Regulatory Commission).
The regulator will then be able to combat more effectively the perverse effects of the current structure of electricity production in Belgium, marked by a quasi-monopoly position of GDFSuez/Electrabel, and remove the obstacles and barriers to healthy competition on this market.
In order to combat energy insecurity, Ecolo also proposes to broaden the status of protected customer, that is to say simply based on income and no longer on more restrictive conditions.
Organize a fairer energy tax system, socially and environmentally
Ecolo wants to make energy taxation fairer from a social and environmental point of view.
Concerning the residential sector, Ecolo thus proposes to modulate tax aid in favor of energy saving investments according to income, and to allow a direct reduction on the bill as is the practice in Wallonia for the purchase of a more CO2-efficient car.
Ecolo also intends to support the most efficient work and modulate tax reductions according to the energy performance of the investments made.
In terms of indirect taxation on energy goods and services, VAT and excise rates must be set taking into account the level of nuisances caused by their production and use throughout the product's life cycle.
The contribution will be lower if the production chain (production, use, disposal) has a reduced impact on the environment, on greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption.
The VAT and excise rates for different fuels and combustibles will thus evolve gradually according to these criteria, by differentiated application of the ratchet mechanism, naturally providing compensation to neutralize the social impact of the measures.
Succeeding in the energy transition
Continue and expand massive investment in renewable energy
Both to protect the climate and to anticipate economic and social tensions linked to peak oil and gas81 and the exploitation of nuclear energy, Belgium must make its energy transition towards renewable energies.
These allow us to enhance local resources, ensure sustainable production, reduce our imports of oil, gas and uranium and create jobs that cannot be relocated.
Wallonia has set an example with enormous growth in green electricity production over the last ten years.
The aim now is to achieve and exceed the objectives imposed by the European Union for 2020 and to define an ambitious strategy for 2030 and 2050, among other things via pricing and the development of the interconnection of European electricity networks.
81 For geological and technical reasons, oil and gas production follows the following pattern: increase, maximum ('peak') and then decline. This diagram, valid on the scale of a well, is valid for the whole of world production. From an economic point of view, what matters is the timing of the 'peak'. Indeed, the supply/demand imbalance subsequently leads to volatility and price increases and finally shortages.
However, this transition cannot take place if we continue to invest in the same way in the solutions of the past, which have shown their limits and have led, among other things, to the current climate and energy impasse.
Respect environmental guidelines
For Ecolo, the energy transition towards renewable energies will not take place without environmental markers and sustainability criteria, like those which accompany the development of wind turbines in the North Sea, for example.
Ecolo therefore proposes to adopt environmental, social and energy guidelines for the use of biomass for energy purposes.
The definition of such markers is also necessary before continuing the development of agrofuels.
With regard to the Federal Nuclear Control Agency, the recommendations of the resolution adopted by Parliament in April 2010 should be implemented as quickly as possible.
Finally, Ecolo proposes to set strict rules for the capture and storage of CO2 from large emitting installations.
This technology, which today monopolizes too large a share of research funding, can only be considered, at best, as a transitional solution whose feasibility, sustainability and profitability are, at this stage, far from being guaranteed.
Implement the nuclear phase-out law and recover undue profits from the operation of nuclear power plants
A marginal energy source at the global level, nuclear power does not represent a credible solution to the climate crisis.
Its environmental drawbacks (hidden energy costs which generate significant CO2 emissions, waste, etc.) or geostrategic drawbacks (security, proliferation, etc.) as well as its real costs are far too high for the sector to constitute a sustainable alternative.
Furthermore, nuclear energy makes it more difficult and more expensive to continue developing renewable energies82.
Ecolo will ensure compliance with the 2003 nuclear phase-out law, which provides for the closure of reactors after a maximum of 40 years of operation.
As reactors age, the risk of accidents increases and, moreover, there is very little experience with high-power reactors with a lifespan of around or over 40 years.
Taking into account the current electricity production unit projects, the decommissioning of the three oldest nuclear reactors by 2015 will not pose any electricity supply problems and will not lead to any increase in electricity prices.
In addition to this, and pending their closure, one of Ecolo's priorities is the adoption of a law aimed at taxing the undue profits of operators of nuclear and coal-fired power stations.
These power plants were depreciated in an accelerated manner before the liberalization of the market (via high tariffs for consumers) and the profits resulting from them must be completely recovered and redistributed to invest in the development of renewable energies, in the control of consumption but also in the reinforcement of energy transport and distribution networks.
Beyond that, there is no justification for linking the recovery of these profits to an extension of the life of nuclear reactors.
A bill to this effect has already been tabled by Ecolo.
The Memorandum of Understanding of October 2009 between the Federal Government and GDFSuez has no legal value and the contributions of the sector must be set out in a law.
82 Thus, in Spain and Germany, two countries which already inject considerable quantities of renewable energy into the grid, wind farms are regularly shut down when demand for electricity is too low, due to the rigidity of nuclear power plants.
Moreover, there is currently no acceptable and fundable solution for the management of nuclear waste, the danger of which will last for thousands of years.
For Ecolo, there can be no question of the citizen, after having paid the accelerated depreciation of the power stations, once again being the fall guy.
The real availability of funds for the dismantling of nuclear power plants and the management of radioactive waste must therefore be guaranteed.
With regard to highly radioactive waste, Ecolo is in favour of temporary and reversible storage in order to better control it and to be able to remove it if a technical solution for treatment or final storage is discovered.
Waste storage must be carried out on the surface, preferably on the very sites of disused production sites (power plants, etc.), in order to ensure optimal monitoring.
Under no circumstances can responsibility for the management of our nuclear waste be transferred to other countries, particularly developing countries, which might be tempted to accept our waste in exchange for a financial contribution or a reduction in their debts.
Preventing the climate crisis by adopting a special climate law
For Ecolo, the disappointment resulting from the Copenhagen summit cannot be used as an excuse to postpone the necessary efforts in the fight against global warming.
Ecolo intends to continue the establishment of global climate governance, while respecting the rights and obligations of each State.
In this regard, the World Conference in Cancun at the end of 2010 will be a crucial step.
Through the Presidency of the European Union, Belgium must convey a message that is both ambitious and constructive: Ecolo proposes that the European Union increase its greenhouse gas emission reduction targets in 2020 to 40% compared to 1990, of which at least ¾ must be within its borders.
The European Union must also commit to financing the mitigation and adaptation of countries most vulnerable to climate change.
At the national level, through the implementation of a special law, Ecolo proposes to include the coordination and management of climate policy among the powers of the federal State, with the Regions therefore retaining the powers in the areas that fall within their remit, to define and implement such a policy, remaining free to be more ambitious if they wish.
The federal level would also be empowered to formulate binding emissions targets following consultation with the Regions.
Thanks to this coordination of public and private actions, Belgium will be able to achieve its objectives of the European energy-climate package both in terms of reducing greenhouse gas emissions, but also in terms of energy efficiency and the development of renewable energies.
The transport, housing and tertiary sectors, which are responsible for the largest increases, will particularly need to be mobilised.
Furthermore, Ecolo proposes that a contribution be considered on the importation of products and services from countries which do not make binding commitments in the framework of the international fight against climate change.
Without further delay, Ecolo proposes to support the transfer of knowledge and technologies in the areas of renewable energy production, rational use of energy, energy efficiency and adaptation to global warming to emerging countries and so-called least developed countries.
These transfers could take place within the framework of an Energy and Climate Agency, to be created within the UN and financed by a global levy on fossil fuels and uranium.
Finally, these measures would be accompanied by the financial transfers necessary to implement them effectively.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Environment axis Environment
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Environment
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
The ecological transition of our lifestyles represents a tremendous opportunity to build a future for all together, ensuring everyone a greater quality of life, respect for the environment, sustainable economic opportunities and social justice83.
Ecolo is committed to this and intends to be the political driving force behind this change, which we hope will be both rapid and positive.
Over time and under pressure from environmentalists, sectoral policies on the environment (water, waste, etc.) are evolving and gradually moving from measures that exclusively repair the impacts of pollution towards preventive policies integrated into economic and social practices.
Although still largely insufficient, this development is underway;
Ecolo intends to intensify it in order to quickly and significantly reduce our country's ecological footprint, protect health and safeguard the biological wealth of our planet.
The evolution of certain indicators is increasingly alarming, particularly in terms of climate change and biodiversity.
So it's high time!
Ensuring a quality environment for all must therefore be a central concern.
Our societies cannot continue to evolve assuming that natural resources (even when used more efficiently) are infinitely available for the production of goods and services.
They must gradually integrate a greater decoupling between well-being and material consumption.
In addition, waste management, the price of water, traffic noise, pollution, etc. are daily realities that affect everyone's living environment and therefore require political and civic support.
While many skills are the prerogative of the Regions, it is the federal State which manages in particular consumer protection policies (linked to health and the environment) and food safety.
As a result, it has the political levers necessary to enforce compliance with quality standards for products.
Through tax incentives, it can also help make green products cheaper.
Finally and above all, the Federal Government, like other Governments, must direct all of its policies towards sustainable development and equip itself with the appropriate tools to achieve this.
83 JeanMichel JAVAUX, “Thank you for your children! “Achieving the ecological transition”, Ed.Luc Pire, 2007.
Ecolo's proposals
Developing a comprehensive strategic vision and ensuring policy sustainability
Defining a real perspective for the future
A global and long-term strategic vision of our territory must be developed on the basis of sustainable development.
Alongside the thematic plans developed for a series of sectoral policies (anti-poverty plan, nutrition-health plan, energy-climate plan, etc.),
Ecolo insists on the need to develop scenarios for a "desired future" by 2050, which must be constructed, compared and debated with all stakeholders (public authorities, civil society, experts, etc.) and allow the definition of a strategic vision.
The law on sustainable development opens up such a perspective;
It must therefore be applied as quickly as possible.
Examine the sustainability of each policy
Ecolo proposes to strengthen and professionalize the implementation of a systematic impact analysis, intended to measure in advance the impact of each political decision on sustainability, as proposed in the law on sustainable development.
This impact analysis will ensure the consistency of the choices proposed in relation to the strategic vision of sustainable development defined by the public authorities.
Establish a sustainable development inspection
In support of the assessment of the sustainability of decisions, Ecolo proposes to create an independent inspection of sustainable development organized on the model of the Finance Inspection in budgetary matters.
Like the Finance Inspectorate, which checks, in particular, the availability of budgetary resources prior to any decision, the Sustainable Development Inspectorate will check the conformity of the proposed decision with the available environmental resources and the strategic vision of sustainable development.
Produce and consume sustainable goods and services
Developing a real product policy
To produce and consume better, it is important to develop a policy based on the following general principles:
o− ensure growth in well-being with lower consumption of material goods;
o− promote products and services whose manufacture, use and disposal exert the lowest possible pressure on the environment and health, through improved eco-efficiency (substitution of materials, eco-design, improvement of manufacturing processes, increase in resource productivity, product durability and recyclability, etc.);
o− change the product approach;
through life cycle analysis, consumer products must become so efficient that they can be used without harm, or even indefinitely, or to benefit the earth at the end of their life (compostable products for example)84;
84 This approach is known as “cradle to cradle”.
o− involve all stakeholders (economic stakeholders, consumer associations, citizens, etc.).
The role of the federal state in this area is important.
The product plan developed in 2009 and focusing on sectors with “high potential for improvement” is an interesting approach, although it could very well be improved.
Ecolo wants to give it much more ambition and accelerate its implementation.
Making green choices cheaper
Ecolo intends to deploy a range of tools to promote access to ecological products at the lowest price:
o− incentive instruments which aim to bring about progressive developments (tax deduction or economic aid for research or investment, producer responsibility and take-back obligation, sectoral agreements, reduction in the VAT rate for the most ecological products and taxation of the most polluting products, purchase bonuses, etc.);
in particular, food products from organic farming must be taxed less to be accessible to everyone;
o− promotional instruments which generate anticipation (labels, awareness campaigns, assistance and advice to economic operators, etc.).
o− binding instruments which set a minimum basis applicable to all actors:
product standards and quality standards, more comprehensive labelling including greenhouse gas content and product origin, etc.
o− advertising regulation instruments, including the prohibition of advertising aimed at children under 12 and advertising for products subject to a public limitation campaign or the supervision of nutritional messages.
This also requires the strengthening of institutional coordination between the federal State (responsible for placing products on the market and taxation), the Regions (responsible for industrial policy and sectoral environmental policies such as waste, water, soil, etc.) and the European level (for example for the compatibility of products with the European internal market).
Allow the purchase of products without packaging and therefore without waste
It is necessary to reduce both the quantity85 and the dangerousness of packaging.
Ecolo is calling for the federal government to implement the 1998 product law, which provides for a reduction in the quantity and dangerousness of packaging.
Furthermore, beverage cans pose a real public cleanliness problem.
To remedy this, Ecolo is proposing to introduce a deposit on these cans and to extend it if necessary to other packaging.
Accelerate the substitution of hazardous chemicals and make less hazardous products available
Ecolo advocates for the flawless application and strengthening of the European REACH regulation (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemical substances) in all companies in the sector.
REACH requires companies that manufacture and/or import chemicals to demonstrate that their substances are safe for the environment and health.
This regulation is also an opportunity to be seized as an accelerator for innovation and research with a view to creating a genuine green chemistry sector.
This policy also provides for the banning of the most dangerous substances from the market (carcinogenic, mutagenic and toxic products for reproduction, persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic substances).
85 For food packaging alone, more than two thirds are single-use.
While nanotechnologies and nanoproducts can represent an opportunity, they can also represent serious risks to the environment and human health.
As with GMOs, before these products are placed on the market, serious studies proving their safety and showing their societal benefit must be carried out.
Finally, it is necessary to develop a strategy to reduce endocrine disruptors, and it is also necessary to strengthen the policy of collecting used medicines, so that their residues do not spread in nature.
Drastically reduce the use of pesticides and biocides, as a priority in our homes and gardens
The 2005 Federal Plan to reduce the risks associated with the use and consumption of pesticides has not achieved its objectives.
On the contrary, the risks have increased in certain areas such as beekeeping (disappearance of bees) and biocides86 used in homes.
This policy is a real failure.
Belgium is now required by a new European directive to draw up a national plan to reduce pesticides and biocides.
Ecolo wants structural measures to be taken to achieve a real reduction in risk and quantities sold, in the agricultural and food sectors, public green spaces and individuals.
Substances placed on the market must therefore be subject to chronic toxicity tests and an assessment of their cumulative effects.
In particular, the risk to bees and other pollinating insects must be assessed and reduced.
Distributors must have training on the products they distribute, both pesticides and biocides, and sales to amateurs must be carried out on demand, behind a counter, and no longer self-service.
Advertising for these dangerous products must be banned and replaced by precise information on the conditions of use of the product, and current labelling rules must be respected and strengthened in order to alert the consumer to the health and environmental dangers of these products.
Biocides, wood treatment products, household insecticides and gardening products are a priority for regulation and disposal.
Beyond that, Ecolo intends to promote the development of organic farming, which does without chemically synthesized pesticides and biocides, and to make it a real opportunity for producers.
Alongside regional policies, Ecolo wants to develop a tax regime favourable to producers who engage in organic production.
Limit exposure to electromagnetic radiation
Ecolo wants to protect citizens from the risks linked to intensive exposure to electromagnetic radiation.
At the federal level, Ecolo proposes in particular to:
o− take an order based on the legislation on product standards which imposes stricter emission standards for emitters of electromagnetic radiation (WiFi, WiMax, Bluetooth, mobile phones, etc.), in particular in order to avoid any unauthorized exposure from the neighborhood;
o− adopt a moratorium on Wi-Fi installations in establishments open to the public, especially for children;
o− provide clear labelling of the level of emission of electromagnetic waves on all transmitters sold to individuals;
o− guarantee the consumer access to wired connections for the installation of electronic equipment at home;
86 The term biocide covers a group of chemical substances such as pesticides, phytosanitary or phytopharmaceutical products, antibiotics for medical, veterinary, domestic or industrial use, disinfectants, etc.
o− develop information and awareness-raising actions on the dangers of intensive use of GSM (and other devices emitting electromagnetic waves) among citizens, and in particular young people;
o− ban advertising aimed at encouraging families to eliminate their landlines in favour of cordless phones.
Limit noise sources
Prevention is the best course of action to reduce the most annoying noise emissions, in particular by limiting noise at source as much as possible.
For example, Ecolo proposes to reduce the noise emission levels of equipment through reinforced product standards.
In any case, Ecolo also intends to guarantee the fundamental right to rest and sleep for all citizens.
Ecolo therefore wants the Brussels National and Charleroi airports to be closed at night, between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m.
At the same time, Ecolo is defending a policy of reducing noise pollution and risks by avoiding flying over the most densely populated areas.
Lead by example
Since public authorities are major consumers of goods and services, they must be exemplary.
Ecolo wants every administration and every ministerial office to have effective environmental management, certified by an EMAS certificate, as some administrations already have.
Events organised by public authorities, for example within the framework of the Belgian Presidency of the European Union, must also be environmentally and socially irreproachable.
Preserve biodiversity, fight against the privatization of living things87 and the plundering of resources
Preserving biodiversity as a collective heritage and for the benefit of everyone
Genetic resources belong to the common heritage of humanity.
If their access and sharing must be regulated through the agreements of the Convention on Biological Diversity, this regulation cannot lead to their privatization which would reduce the use of the resource for all.
In this spirit, Ecolo opposes direct or indirect attempts to privatize biodiversity resources and the patenting of living things.
Furthermore, Belgian action within the framework of the CITES convention regulating international trade in wild species must be strengthened.
The list of species authorised for marketing in our country must also be reduced.
The world's major reservoirs of biodiversity are found in developing countries.
The most vulnerable, women, children, the elderly, as well as the poorest people on the planet are also the first victims of the disappearance of the ecosystems richest in biodiversity.
The objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity must be integrated into development aid policy with priority attention to forest and humid ecosystems.
Forest protection also has an indisputable link with climate preservation.
As the world's largest importer of timber and with illegal logging being a leading cause of deforestation, Europe has a particular responsibility to put an end to it.
For Ecolo, beyond voluntary certification processes, the European Union must adopt and implement a regulation guaranteeing that wood, forest biomass and all wood products placed on the European market come from legal sources and sustainably managed forests.
87 The notion of living extends from the gene to the animal, passing through cells, microorganisms and plants.
Protect species from overexploitation and promote local nature
Fish and aquatic species are among the most threatened natural resources today.
Some scientists predict the total disappearance of wild fish by 2050.
European fisheries policy must be completely revised with a view to preserving resources:
limitation of quotas and opening periods, total ban on the harvesting of certain particularly threatened species such as bluefin tuna, restructuring plan for the sector to benefit traditional fishing, support for extensive and quality aquaculture outside sensitive marine areas.
Like forest certification, it is necessary to promote products from sustainable fishing and labelled as such (Marine Stewardship Council MSC, for example).
Public authorities must also pursue an active policy of promotion, use and protection of wild native plant species in their respective areas of competence (green spaces, redevelopment after works, etc.).
Ecolo also intends to implement a policy to combat invasive species.
Globalization, the increase in trade and climate change are leading to a significant increase in the number of invasive non-native species in our country (Asian ladybugs, giant hogweed, exotic ducks, etc.).
Some of these species sometimes prove harmful and can create economic losses or public health problems, or even upset natural balances.
Measures to eradicate them or slow their spread must be taken.
This involves in particular a revision of the royal decree on trade in wild fauna and flora species to include the most problematic species as well as regional action plans.
Finally, Ecolo is attached to the federal character of the North Sea.
For Ecolo, the management of our maritime domain must allow the many activities present in this maritime domain (fishing, extraction of mineral resources, tourism, exploitation of renewable energy potential, etc.) to coexist in a sustainable manner, but also to maintain the specific natural heritage that it hosts.
Improving the living conditions of farm animals
The ethics that should exist between man and animal are regularly flouted.
The 1986 Animal Welfare Act, which constitutes the legislative basis for animal welfare in our country, must be constantly strengthened and amended to meet the new expectations of our society in its relationship with animals.
Ecolo wants to contribute to this development through several initiatives.
Therefore, the development of all alternative methods to animal testing must be encouraged.
Beyond that, Ecolo wants a gradual exit from animal testing, starting with sectors where the contribution in terms of public health is less (cosmetology, for example).
Furthermore, the only acceptable fur is that which comes from the recycling of skins from animals slaughtered for consumption of their meat.
No breeding can be tolerated for fur.
For the transport of live animals, Ecolo favours the improvement of transport conditions and the control of existing legislation on the setting of maximum distances or journey times.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Environment Food Agriculture axis
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Food Agriculture
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Globally, food production methods are going through an unprecedented crisis:
overproduction for some, famine for others, sudden increase and then collapse of prices, concentration of power within a few transnational companies, declining nutritional quality of products, etc.
However, the common agricultural policy implemented by Europe does not seem to have learned the lessons of the multiple crises (milk crisis, mad cow crisis, etc.) by continuing with a logic that is mainly productivist and cost-reducing, to the detriment, if necessary, of the imperatives of public health and environmental preservation.
Ecolo wishes to initiate public action in favour of healthy, quality food, sustainable, accessible to everyone, which will contribute to public health, the maintenance of family farming, the protection and restoration of natural resources (water, soil, biodiversity) and the fight against climate change.
This implies in particular a proactive approach and coordinated action between the different levels of power.
Ecolo's proposals
Ensuring healthy and quality food
Protect access to essential goods
Water is a natural resource essential to human beings.
This implies that access to water of sufficient quality and quantity must be recognised as a fundamental human right and enshrined in the Constitution.
Water management must remain public, with appropriate control by democratic power and citizens.
Furthermore, the right to food is recognized by the United Nations as a fundamental right as well.
Ecolo therefore advocates that it also be included in our Constitution as the “right to healthy and safe food”.
Generalize a diet that is as healthy as it is safe
The federal government can take action to promote sustainable food, particularly in terms of food safety standards.
The Federal Agency for the Safety of the Food Chain (AFSCA) must be oriented towards nutritional quality as much as towards food safety.
Current health regulations tend to discriminate against small farmers and processors and do not particularly encourage, in processed and prepared foods, the search for nutritional qualities highlighted by nutrition specialists.
The meat diet is too high in Belgium and poses public health problems.
It also contributes to our ecological debt through imports of livestock feed.
Ecolo proposes that public community restaurants systematically offer a vegetarian dish, reduce the proportion of meat, increase the portions of vegetables and offer fruit in all menus, with the aim of improving the nutritional and dietary balance of the plate.
Ecolo wants to encourage the private sector to do the same.
For the general public, Ecolo is proposing to lead an awareness campaign for a more balanced diet that is beneficial to health, the climate and the environment.
Ecolo also proposes to legislate on the addition of water, "trans" fats, palm oil, sugars - particularly poor quality glucose-fructose syrups - and salt in processed products.
Ecolo believes that a regulatory framework will produce significant improvements in terms of food quality and impact on public health.
Ecolo also wants to prevent the development and dissemination of GMOs at the federal level.
Ecolo proposes, among other things, to strengthen the independence of the evaluation and authorization procedures and to return the decision-making power to the democratic power by ensuring that each GMO request is subject to an analysis of the socio-economic and societal opportunity of GMOs.
AFSCA controls relating to the presence of contaminants (in particular pesticides) must be expanded in order to better protect consumers, to identify responsibilities and, where appropriate, to impose the required sanctions.
Making food a determinant of health for all
A national nutrition and health plan was developed in 2006.
Unfortunately, the resulting measures are far from having proven their effectiveness.
Ecolo proposes to:
o− provide priority and specific support to vulnerable populations who are little reached by traditional campaigns relating to healthy eating;
o− encourage and train social assistance and health stakeholders for this purpose within the framework of partnerships;
o− support public health stakeholders and professionals (CLPS, PSE, doctors, etc.) with a view to strengthening preventive medicine, health promotion and health education;
o− promote early detection of obesity involving different stakeholders (ONE, general practitioners, PSE) and rapid management of excess weight through multidisciplinary support.
Recoupling agricultural policy with food policy and territory
Relocating agriculture, promoting employment, respect for the environment and food sovereignty in the North and the South
The two pillars of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) – the competitiveness of agriculture through the mechanism of direct aid and rural development – ​​accentuate the coexistence of two-speed agriculture, on the one hand by supporting areas of large-scale production and intensificationconcentration of livestock farming,
and on the other hand, by confining missions linked to rural development (maintenance of space, protection of biodiversity, quality agriculture, etc.) to more disadvantaged areas.
This policy contributes to the marginalization and disappearance of peasant agriculture, without providing a truly effective response to environmental problems.
The relocation of agriculture appears to be the only positive response to the challenges of food sovereignty in the North and the South, to environmental problems linked to intensive agriculture, but also to the maintenance of rural and agricultural employment.
To ensure a policy of food sovereignty, Ecolo also believes that, within the framework of the necessary overhaul of agricultural policies, a regulation of agricultural and food markets very different from the current practices of strengthening free trade is necessary.
Agriculture must be able to be considered by the WTO as a specific sector, benefiting from exception clauses with the aim of food sovereignty.
Furthermore, the role of women in agriculture, and particularly in ensuring the survival of their families, is essential in countries of the South and must therefore be valued.
In Belgium, Ecolo advocates a strengthening of the role of the food price observatory and the implementation of the instruments of the law on price control as soon as abnormal situations appear on the market, both to the detriment of producers (market price lower than the cost of production, jeopardizing the maintenance of local production and the fundamental players in the rural world) and consumers.
Indeed, the developments observed in recent years have shown the need to regulate the price of certain essential goods such as bread, milk, starchy foods, or certain fruits and vegetables that are important in the nutritional diet, for their mineral and vitamin content and sold without processing.
There is also a need for a more transparent price labelling system to allow greater comparison between products (for example, greater emphasis on price/unit weight;
better readability of labeling to identify the quality of raw materials such as cheap but low nutritional content hydrogenated fats).
The federal government must also encourage the development of organic farming, particularly in terms of taxation.
Finally, Ecolo believes that the use of agrofuels must meet strict and binding social and environmental standards (sustainability criteria), by applying the European directive on renewable energies with a high level of requirement, both for our local production and for our imports.
It is therefore appropriate to adopt such markers before continuing their development.
Ensuring access to land for farmers and maintaining soil quality
Equitable and secure access to land, as a factor in food production, is fundamental and must be governed by public policies.
For Ecolo, this resource must be better shared and contribute to the maintenance of small and medium-sized farms.
Ecolo proposes the revision of the law on farm leases in order to promote access to land with the aim of keeping the greatest number of farmers active, while ensuring their long-term security.
If access to land is a right, it must also be a responsibility for the operator.
Due to intensive agriculture, soil quality is deteriorating.
Ecolo therefore hopes that the revision of the farm lease will be in line with the tenant's greater responsibility for the quality and fertility of the soil as well as the protection of biodiversity.
The federal state also has powers in tax matters;
Thus, the flat-rate taxation of farmers must be reviewed in order to avoid the tendency to increase the margin per hectare.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Environment, Mobility, Transport axis
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Mobility Transport
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Faced with the scarcity of fossil fuels and the concomitant increase in the price of fuel,
in the face of congestion which affects an increasing part of our road and motorway infrastructure and causes stress and costly losses of time, for businesses and individuals alike, and
Faced with the urgent measures to be taken to combat climate change and air pollution in general, some people still prefer to convince themselves that one or another technological innovation will eventually take over...
For Ecolo, on the contrary, it is important to tackle these issues head on and develop proactive policies to bring about a change of direction.
The sooner we address these challenges, the less it will cost us and future generations to do so.
In Belgium, the traditional levers of mobility and transport policy are, to a large extent, in the hands of the regions.
This is particularly the case for skills linked to regional planning, infrastructure, regional airports, the promotion of cycling and local public transport.
But the federal state must also play an important role in such essential areas as railways, regulation, and particularly the highway code.
The Buizingen (Hal) disaster is undoubtedly a significant, dramatic event of the legislature that is coming to an end in terms of rail transport.
Although neither the investigation nor the parliamentary commission set up have yet delivered their conclusions, this terrible accident has already highlighted the unacceptable delay accumulated by our railways in terms of automatic train protection (braking systems reacting to impulses transmitted by the signalling).
While most neighbouring countries have been equipped with such systems for years and are now committed to deploying interoperable systems (compatible with the European standard in this area), our railways are reduced to urgently developing a less efficient and non-interoperable "national" solution.
In addition, it should be noted that despite a relative drop in traffic due to the crisis, train punctuality has deteriorated significantly during this period, leading to record and very legitimate levels of dissatisfaction among users.
It is also necessary to note a serious erosion of the operating result of SNCB, which was not compensated by the results posted by the two other components of the Group, Infrabel and the Holding.
The completion of the RER in and around Brussels has once again been postponed by a few years.
And the tensions between the three entities of the Group finally burst into the open, confirming what Ecolo has always thought, namely that it would have been preferable not to split SNCB into three autonomous entities in 2004.
but rather to strengthen the independence, skills and prerogatives of national regulators, so as to comply with European requirements in this area, without multiplying the number of management bodies and without generating unnecessary coordination costs.
In the aviation sector, the recent eruptions of Eyjafjöll in Iceland have highlighted the potentially disastrous consequences resulting from our significant collective dependence on aircraft, while this mode of transport is also subject to many other hazards, and is also destined to eventually suffer the full force of the inevitable scarcity of fossil fuels.
Finally, much remains to be done to further reduce the number of road victims which, with a thousand deaths per year in our country, remains far too high.
The transport sector is today at a crossroads.
For Ecolo, meeting the mobility challenge is a decisive test of the credibility of any strategy for gradually phasing out fossil fuels, combating climate change and the deterioration of public health, while ensuring social equity in access to transport.
Concretely, in conjunction with regional policies, this involves controlling the demand for mobility,
to take all necessary measures for the widest possible modal shift from motor vehicles to public transport and soft modes for people, and from road and air to waterways and rail for goods,
and to develop a strengthened road safety policy.
Ecolo's proposals
Controlling transport demand and prioritizing sustainable modes of transport
To avoid paralysis and asphyxiation tomorrow, particularly in and around large cities, we must first do everything possible to control the growth in demand and optimize modal choices by favoring the most sustainable modes of transport.
But at the same time, we must gradually remedy the various mechanisms which lead to inconsiderate use of planes and excessive dependence on private cars.
It is not a question of being against planes or cars, which are essential in a certain number of cases, but rather of preventing their overconsumption.
Improving the attractiveness of public transport, particularly the train
Safe, reliable, comfortable and affordable public transport, as far as federal government matters, requires:
a significant increase in the resources devoted to rail so as to offer, in addition to the development of other public transport and soft modes, a quality service to non-motorized people and an efficient and reliable alternative to the private car;
a priority investment in railway safety through the immediate deployment of automatic train protection systems (braking assistance) meeting the highest European standards;
drastic measures to improve reliability and punctuality to regain user confidence and attract new customers to the railways;
an increase in the supply allowing everyone, with exceptions for short distances, to travel seated and in good conditions, which requires the commissioning of trains with suitable capacity and an increase in frequencies aiming, for intercity travel, for an offer of at least one train per hour (systematically reinforced for regional towns and large conurbations);
an expanded offer in the evening and at weekends, which ensures that the train is not only an alternative to the car for home-work commutes but also offers an attractive service for leisure and other trips;
an end to the policy of closing and decommissioning certain lines or stations;
a policy of redeploying safe, comfortable, user-friendly, secure stations that are easily accessible to pedestrians, cyclists, users of other public transport and motorists, including people with reduced mobility;
This includes in particular the reopening, modernisation and development of as many Brussels stations as possible, as part of the implementation of the RER and aimed at providing efficient links between Brussels and its outskirts, but also a significant contribution to the mobility needs of the capital region, in addition to the services of the STIB;
obetter coordination between SNCB and other public transport companies, in the development of stations and stopping points, in the coordination of timetables, in the deployment of integrated ticketing, pricing and information systems, allowing combined use of several modes and easy connections;
truly attractive and clear prices, taking into account the specific needs and the effective purchasing power of the different categories of users;
the adoption of more specific measures in the event of a pollution peak (strengthening of supply, one-off pricing measures, etc.).
These measures must be given budgetary priority and give rise to a clearer definition by the State of the public service missions assigned to SNCB in its management contract.
Promoting alternatives to air transport
Ecolo considers it ecologically unacceptable that air transport often remains cheaper than the train, while the train contributes significantly less to climate change.
This is an aberration of our current mobility model that needs to be modified, gradually but significantly.
Ecolo believes that public authorities (the European Union, Belgium and its Regions) must slow the development of short and medium distance air transport for both the transport of people and goods, in order to favour alternatives.
The numerous tax advantages and significant subsidies enjoyed by air transport have led to excessive development of this mode of transport, to the detriment of other modes, despite its considerable impact on health and the environment.
Ecolo advocates in particular for:
o-the accelerated development of an alternative rapid train service across the continent and the promotion of conventional or high-speed train transport over short and medium distances;
o-the creation by the railway companies, under the supervision of the European Railway Agency, of a common information and reservation centre;
the obligation for airline reservation systems to publish for each air route information relating to alternative rail routes, including the respective environmental performances of each mode;
the implementation of a tax on kerosene, standardised at European level, and a contribution on airline tickets;
the elimination of direct and indirect public subsidies for air transport;
the integration of air transport into the international system of exchange and reduction of CO2 quotas;
the development of TGV freight between major European logistics platforms, particularly airports;
a stronger ban on “hopping” by plane, when alternatives exist.
Developing the role of sustainable fashions, for goods too
The use of the most environmentally friendly modes of transport must also be encouraged for the transport of goods, by making the most of the potential of trains, waterways and combined transport, allowing more targeted use of trucks.
This assumes:
the maintenance and, if necessary, installation of railway branches in the main industrial areas;
the upgrading of certain parts of the network in order to offer freight trains efficient paths (rights of way), without entering into competition with passenger traffic;
the granting of service guarantees (rights of way) on the freight network;
the development of high-performance multimodal transhipment platforms;
the granting of financial incentives for combined transport;
the internalization of external costs through a system of taxation per kilometer traveled for road transport of goods, the revenues of which would be fully reinvested in the maintenance and improvement of transport infrastructure and equipment, and in mitigating their environmental impact;
the implementation of innovative solutions for the distribution of goods in cities (less polluting vehicles, development of urban delivery spaces, transport of small parcels on public transport);
the relocation of production activities, particularly in the agricultural and food sector;
At the same time, Ecolo is in favour of ecological labelling of products based on their CO2 content, taking into account in particular the mode of transport used.
Substitute shared cars for as many owned cars as possible
So that occasional use of a car no longer necessarily implies the purchase of a private vehicle, it is appropriate to strengthen, in consultation with the Regions, an environment favorable to the development of carpooling, carsharing, short-term car rentals, individual or collective taxi services, home deliveries
through tax incentive measures, through the systematic integration of this type of option in municipal mobility plans and company travel plans, through the implementation of a global reflection on the priority allocation of parking spaces to these modes of collective use compared to private vehicles (near stations, hospitals, schools, supermarkets, shopping districts, etc.).
Rebalancing taxation
Every year in Belgium, more than 250,000 new car registrations are company cars.
These benefit from an advantageous tax regime.
This system, which represents a significant additional income for many workers, requires revision in order to orient it towards a more sustainable regime, in particular to link it to the vehicle's Ecoscore and its level of consumption.
This very particular tax regime encourages many companies to partially remunerate some of their staff by providing them with a car and fuel, and which naturally pushes the employees concerned to favor this mode of transport to the detriment of more sustainable alternatives.
The revision of this system should be fully offset by other positive measures aimed at workers (for example to reduce labour tax) and by the development of sustainable alternatives to the company car in terms of mobility.
Pending this revision, Ecolo is also proposing an alternative to the tax advantage of company cars by granting a rechargeable “Hypermobil” card with comparable tax advantages but providing access to a wide range of more sustainable transport services (public transport, bicycles, shared cars).
In the same vein, partial tax exemption for housing located in relatively urbanized areas or close to intermodal hubs could also be considered.
Promoting soft modes
At the same time, the federal government must do everything possible to facilitate the use of cycling and walking for shorter journeys within the framework of its powers in terms of road safety and traffic policing (see below) and in terms of taxation, for example:
by making the bicycle allowance granted for home-work journeys compulsory, by introducing a comparable allowance for business journeys and by increasing in the first case the tax exemption of the benefit granted;
o by offering road managers the possibility of authorising cyclists to turn right on red lights, taking into account foreign experience in this area;
o by reducing VAT on the sale and repair of bicycles to 6%, in consultation with Europe.
Plan, coordinate and evaluate transport policies, including at European level
Given the multiplicity of political instruments and modes of transport relevant to mobility and the dispersion of their control between the entities of our country, Ecolo advocates for a strengthening of coordination between the different levels of power in this area, based on a national strategic vision and increased support for research programmes dedicated to transport.
Ecolo also considers it necessary to strengthen the independence and skills of regulators and administrations responsible for the safety and organisation of public transport (planning of networks, particularly trans-European, development and monitoring of management contracts).
Finally, Ecolo believes that it is appropriate to rigorously and objectively evaluate the effects of the policies already implemented in the railway sector at the instigation of Europe, within the framework of what has been called the first railway package.
This is to avoid, while there is still time, the perverse effects and additional coordination problems which could result from further liberalisation of the railways (opening up domestic passenger transport to competition) which would not take sufficient account of the specific features of our country (dense network, highly interconnected services, etc.).
Promote the use of sustainable equipment and behaviors
Beyond the measures to be taken to control transport demand and to optimise the role of each mode in the mobility of people and goods, it is important to ensure, mode by mode, the use of the safest and most environmentally friendly equipment and practices.
For Ecolo, this involves a wide range of essentially sectoral measures.
Stepping up the fight against road insecurity
The number of road accident victims, although slightly decreasing in recent years, remains far too high.
Experiments carried out abroad in the area of ​​speed and alcohol control, in particular, demonstrate that it is possible to further reduce the number and severity of accidents in order to achieve, in the relatively short term, an intermediate objective of a maximum of 500 deaths per year on the road, as envisaged during the last federal road safety summit in 2007.
In general, federal road safety policy must better integrate and reconcile the points of view of the different categories of users concerned, which requires the implementation of an ongoing dialogue with their representative associations.
This is particularly true for road professionals such as truck drivers, coach operators, bus and taxi drivers, but also for cyclists and users of motorised two-wheelers (motorcycles, mopeds, etc.), whether or not equipped with sidecars, who are more vulnerable.
To the extent that the safety of these users also depends on the quality, maintenance and specific equipment (such as crash barriers suitable for two-wheelers, signage, etc.) of the road network, which fall under the responsibility of the Regions, and the prevention programmes implemented in schools, it is also important that the federal State consults with the other federated entities on these matters.
In addition, compliance with driving times and social legislation by road hauliers and coaches must be subject to increased controls, as must the transport of dangerous materials (accreditations, labelling, loads, etc.).
Finally, measures in favour of road safety and targeted changes to the Highway Code must also help to create an environment more favourable to the development of soft modes of transport (walking, cycling, etc.).
In this regard, Ecolo intends to deepen all the measures adopted within the framework of the "Street Code" under the 1999-2003 legislature, with a view to better sharing the street and specifically protecting pedestrians and cyclists.
Promote the purchase of “cleaner” vehicles, boats and fuels
At the European level, Ecolo supports the adoption of stricter environmental standards for CO2 emissions, both for private cars and commercial vehicles.
Without prejudice to the fiscal prerogatives of the Regions, tax incentives promoting the use of private or utility vehicles and the least energy-intensive and most environmentally friendly equipment (particle filters, LPG or compressed natural gas tanks, etc.) at the federal level must be developed, strengthened and regularly adjusted so that the tax reductions granted on the least polluting vehicles are financed by the additional revenue generated by the most polluting vehicles, as is the case with the Walloon ecobonus/ecomalus system, for example.
In this context, Ecolo also advocates taking into account the Ecoscore rather than CO2 emissions, which only represents a part of the nuisances generated and whose assessment remains questionable in the automotive sector.
Finally, it is appropriate to review the specific aid granted to the inland waterway sector, with a view to encouraging the purchase of the most efficient equipment in terms of consumption and emissions.
Reducing the nuisance caused by air traffic
In addition to the measures proposed above, Ecolo recommends, in particular in the case of Brussels National Airport, which falls under federal jurisdiction:
the banning of the noisiest aircraft by further reducing the noise quotas permitted per aircraft and per period in the vicinity of this airport;
the elimination of night flights between 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. in order to make it an exclusively daytime airport and, in the immediate future, the extension of operating limits and flight procedures in force at night until 7 a.m., instead of 6 a.m. currently;
the revision of air routes taking into account the population density criterion with a view to maximum avoidance of urban areas during take-off procedures;
o-the implementation of appropriate land and insulation policies in areas most exposed to noise;
o-the objectification, optimization and effective control of noise zones and air procedures by an independent control authority;
o-the capping of the overall number of aircraft movements (take-offs and landings) per year and the definitive abandonment of the low-cost terminal project imagined by the operator, given the serious nuisances that this airport imposes on Brussels and its outskirts due to its excessive proximity.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Axis Living together, here and elsewhere Justice
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Justice
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Ecolo intends to restore to Justice its role as a third power, regulator of social life, guarantor of the freedoms and rights of each person.
Justice is at the heart of citizens’ expectations.
Today, the weakening of social ties and the increasing dehumanization of relationships between individuals make dialogue, exchange and the peaceful and constructive resolution of conflicts ever more difficult.
Justice is then seen as the only possible recourse.
Alongside this development, we must deal with crime and violence against people.
Being attacked, burgled or simply living in fear is intolerable and can lead people to become distrustful and withdrawn.
The inadequacy of dissuasive and preventive measures leaves the police and public prosecutors with full responsibility for defending our right to security.
It is still necessary for Justice to have the means to hear the litigants and re-establish the authority of the rule.
However, because of its heaviness, its hermeticism, the lack of resources and the poor organisation, the intervention of Justice still too often constitutes a denial of justice in the eyes of citizens.
The inglorious cases that have recently hit the headlines have deeply undermined the authority of the magistrate and his image of impartiality.
These situations give some a feeling of impunity and others a feeling of unacceptable abandonment and insecurity.
In civil matters, they sometimes lead to the poisoning of conflicts which could be resolved quickly and simply.
All this, added to the cost of the procedures, discourages many litigants in advance who give up seeking justice when they do not have the means to support a long and uncertain procedure.
The last legislatures have allowed some progress.
The so-called “Little Franchimont” reform contributes to better consideration of victims;
the High Council of Justice was established;
the procedure before the Assize Court has been corrected;
The Atomium group, in which Ecolo participated constructively, has put forward for debate certain interesting avenues in the area of ​​judicial organisation and the discipline of magistrates.
But these projects are often awaiting concrete results, or are even completely called into question.
The Phoenix project to computerize Justice, renamed Cheops, remains a fiasco.
The gun law has been diverted from its purpose of tracking and reducing the number of guns in circulation;
Today it is proving its ineffectiveness.
The outgoing Minister of Justice's plan for reforming the judicial landscape is a 180° turn from the Thémis Plan, and contains proposals that would undermine what works.
For reasons of community symbolism, some consider it a priority to split the judicial district of Brussels-Hal-Vilvoorde, without necessarily taking into account how to reduce the Kafkaesque backlog that is immobilising it.
Other reforms must be expanded or modified, particularly in the areas of family law, environmental law, preventive detention and criminal procedure.
Sufficient resources must be made available.
And this, by involving the actors of Justice and law in the reflection and implementation, and by avoiding security and emotional excesses.
For Ecolo, after the debate and the evaluation, it is now time to move on to decisions and implementation.
But instead of supporting the actors in their missions and providing minimum funding for them, the Government has imposed austerity measures on the Department of Justice, thus breaking the essential relationship of trust with the representative bodies.
In any reform, Ecolo makes it a priority to make Justice accessible to all.
We must remember the high cost of justice for its users, but also point out its inaccessible language.
The backlog of cases must come before community disputes, because it is undoubtedly the most discouraging factor for litigants and for those involved in the justice system.
Similarly, the Justice system must master the new issues that arise, whether they relate to family law, women's rights or the right to a preserved and quality environment.
Ecolo's proposals
Delivering Justice Within a Reasonable Time
A society in which the judicial decision, the sanction or the finding of innocence is the result of a process that lasts years, sometimes even more than a decade, is a fundamentally unjust society.
Often, compensation for the damage is no longer possible, the perpetrator's amendment is no longer an option, the feeling of impunity is established or public opinion has already wrongly condemned the individual.
When acts of aggression are committed, the public authority must provide a rapid, fair and proportionate response.
Strict deadlines must be established and respected by judges, administrative authorities, lawyers and litigants.
This priority must be met in a transversal manner, through a series of converging measures.
Immunizing the judiciary from linear budgetary restriction measures
The episode of circular 154, which at the end of 2009 imposed untenable restrictions on courts and tribunals, showed how the absence of informed choices in budgetary conclaves had absurd consequences on the continued functioning of the courts.
The framework of magistrates, but also of clerks and judicial personnel, must be complete and replacements must be ensured without postponement.
Implementing the computerization of Justice
While companies involved in litigation or financial offenders are equipped with all the skills and technologies, judges are still in the era of cardboard and paper.
The computerization of procedures and services must be completed in a complete, unified and efficient manner.
Adapt time-wasting procedures
Many unnecessary citations could be avoided by adapting certain procedures of the judicial code.
Provided that the rights of the parties and the defence are fairly respected, Ecolo proposes to give probative value to simplified acts which promote the execution of uncontested measures or conciliation, without intervention by the judge.
Making Justice Accessible
Improving assistance to litigants
For Ecolo, it is urgent to make Justice more accessible to citizens, which requires first and foremost an improvement in the systems of assistance to litigants (fundamental right guaranteed by article 23 of the Constitution), including for those who wish first to use all alternative forms of conflict resolution such as mediation or arbitration.
In terms of pro deo legal aid, the system of financial participation of beneficiaries must be thoroughly reviewed to enable more people to benefit from this aid.
Despite the effort that has just been made in this area, it remains essential to expand the budget envelope and to set the value of the "point" at a decent level for lawyers who agree to engage in the legal aid system.
It is also necessary to significantly reduce the time it takes for lawyers to obtain their fees.
For the rest of the population, the "Purple" Government88 limited itself to legal protection insurance, which the outgoing majority proposes to make tax deductible.
We cannot be satisfied with this commercial logic which will favour high incomes.
Ecolo proposes a mutualisation of legal defence costs which, like health and disability insurance, would be universal and based on solidarity.
The contribution would be proportional to income and would include a co-payment.
In addition to this solidarity formula, an active policy of promoting alternative methods of dispute resolution must be pursued and developed, through the implementation of a formalized and mandatory information mechanism for litigants regarding the existence of credible alternatives to legal proceedings.
Evaluate and correct the system of repeatability of lawyers' fees
"This measure, according to which the "loser" of the trial can be ordered to pay, in addition to the costs of the proceedings, the lawyer's fees of the opposing party, presents undeniable advantages on paper, but its implementation could prove disastrous from the point of view of access to justice for all."
The outcome of a trial is never predictable, even for parties of good faith who may ultimately hesitate to assert their legitimate rights against wealthier parties who would hire an army of expensive lawyers.
Ecolo is calling for an evaluation of this system.
Extend the right to take legal action to associations
Associations play an essential role in building a representative democracy, in defending the environment, the weakest and in taking into account new social issues.
Ecolo wants to generalize the right to take legal action to non-profit associations, within the limits of their social purpose, as already exists in certain specific areas (human rights, fight against racism and xenophobia, business practices, union actions).
Making Justice and Law Semantically More Accessible
Ecolo also proposes that a major reformulation project be launched, under the aegis of the High Council of Justice, aimed at facilitating "semantic" access to Justice and the law to enable as many citizens as possible to understand its language, to read its judgments, requests or summonses from bailiffs.
The dignity of Justice can undoubtedly be preserved despite the use of terms that are more understandable to citizens.
88 Legislature 20032007.
Carrying out the Atomium reform in a realistic and relevant manner
Ecolo proposes to promote the opinions that the judicial authorities have produced as part of the Atomium project to reform the judicial landscape.
Without preconceptions or exclusivity, this reform must improve the voluntary mobility of magistrates with the aim of taking advantage of their essential specialization by subject.
An increase in the size of the districts can be justified but on condition that the current hearing locations and registries are maintained close to citizens.
The aim of this reform cannot simply be to make savings.
As the proposals currently stand, the split of the Brussels-Hal-Vilvoorde district would be of no interest, other than to respond to a community agenda.
Scenarios for splitting courts must first demonstrate that they will not increase the backlog of cases and the burden of procedures and that they will provide added value for litigants, regardless of their language.
Ecolo also supports the objective of the "integral management" model of the Atomium note which promotes the autonomy of the courts.
But this model cannot lead to a dilution of political responsibilities on heads of corps who have no influence on the budgetary choices imposed by the government.
Establish a transparent complaints management procedure and improve the disciplinary procedure for magistrates
When they feel that justice is not working properly, when decisions are misunderstood, when certain actors are “unscrupulous”, litigants feel helpless.
They cry conspiracy, denial of justice.
To reconcile, explain or correct this type of situation, Ecolo proposes the establishment, within the High Council of Justice, of a complaints handling procedure that is transparent, independent and useful.
On the disciplinary level, Ecolo wants to review the procedures to eliminate the proximity between the sanctioning authority and the offending magistrate.
The intervention of non-magistrate lawyers may be a solution, but the fundamental principles of the rule of law, namely the irremovability and independence of judges, must naturally remain guaranteed.
Developing a real policy for the execution of sentences
Guaranteeing sufficient resources for the Sentencing Courts
Ecolo proposes an increase in the resources, personnel and prerogatives of the Sentence Application Courts (TAP), so that this real progress in criminal matters can be achieved.
Budgets must match these ambitions.
Furthermore, Ecolo approves the extension of TAP to social defence as in force since 2007, but requests that a medico-social skills assessor be associated with it.
Ensure a fair and coherent policy for the execution of sentences
Monitoring the application of the sentence must aim at its effectiveness on the convicted person and take into account its necessity for the perpetrator of the offence and society.
The prisoner must know the rules, the rights available to him, the conditions of temporary release or the possible special arrangements (provisional release, electronic surveillance, etc.).
This is the role played since February 2007 by five Sentence Enforcement Courts (which may be composed of several chambers).
They must, in complete independence, decide on the terms and merits of the execution of sentences handed down by the lower courts, with the possibility of appeal.
Ecolo recommends broadening their missions to the issue of short or exceptional outings and leaves, interruptions in the execution of sentences and provisional releases which until now remain the responsibility of the executive.
Failing that, this power exercised by the prison management should be regulated by a legal text (and no longer a circular, as is currently the case).
Today, the decision to release certain prisoners early is taken mainly on the basis of prison overcrowding, which is far from optimal.
Finally, Ecolo recommends that the TAPs also be recognised as competent in matters of social defence and that, in this context, a third assessor, with medical-social competence, be added to the two assessors, one from the prison world and the other from the world of reintegration.
Better support for Justice Centers and specialized services
The financial and human resources of the Houses of Justice must be strengthened because they are essential to the emancipation of the "parajudicial" sector from its mandating authorities (magistrates, commissions and penitentiary establishments).
Ecolo is also asking that specialist private services also benefit from more resources, particularly in terms of personnel, to be able to provide daily monitoring of the people referred to them.
If the ultimate goal of punishment is to repair the relationship between the perpetrator, the victim and society, we cannot tolerate the services involved operating as pilot projects of limited duration or with paltry budgets that no longer allow them to provide quality work.
Giving meaning to the sentences of convicts
Open a debate on the meaning of punishment and evaluate its different forms
Until recently, the use of imprisonment was at the heart of the penal response, alongside fines.
Recent legislation has sought to decentralize this channel of incarceration by promoting alternatives to detention.
We need to assess its effects and relevance, by questioning the regulation we want in the future for delinquent behavior.
It is therefore urgent to ask how new forms of criminal sanctions are being used today.
The recently introduced work sentence, for example, is at the heart of this questioning.
What about the use of administrative sanctions: should their application be promoted? The evolution of our societies, in a context of prison overcrowding, invites us to re-examine this question of the meaning of punishment and to evaluate its diversification.
For Ecolo, it is important that the public authority provides a rapid, fair and proportionate response when acts of aggression are committed.
In this context, confinement is the ultimate measure in the event of serious danger to society.
Prison, even in these limited cases, must not be a simple place of restraint.
This downtime must, in fact, also be used to consider the person's future and organize their return to society with them in order to limit the risks of reoffending.
Redefine prison policy and provide legal status for female prisoners
Improving the organisation of prison life and the status of prisoners
Belgian prisons are pressure cookers, due to prison overcrowding and the lack of vision of their role in the reconstruction of individuals beyond the normal and legitimate fulfillment of the sentence to which they have been condemned.
Ecolo therefore proposes to reform the organisation of life in prison and to ensure the correct status of prisoners, the first step in their reintegration into society.
Ecolo first proposes that the law on the legal status of detained persons, passed in 2005, be finally implemented and supplemented with provisions relating to the organisation of the prison regime (intervention of each actor and collaboration between central administration, prisons, social services and psychomedical services).
Ecolo also proposes to develop an ambitious training policy for prison staff, so that they feel fully recognised in their role and bearers of the reform, rather than being called into question, as is the case today.
The role of prison officer must be a profession in its own right, with a possible orientation towards social defence.
Ecolo proposes to strengthen the psychosocial teams responsible for giving an opinion on the granting of exit permits and early release.
They will thus inform the TAP's decisions.
Inside the prison, Ecolo proposes to develop social life: less human contact leads to more desocialization, especially as sentences get longer.
Prison officers have a role to play in this regard.
Restorative justice must begin at the time of incarceration and the intervention of external services will be coordinated and generalized.
Similarly, in collaboration with the federated entities, Ecolo wants to strengthen the policy of socio-educational supervision of prisoners, of access to training or to education.
It guarantees the reduction of the risks of reoffending by better preparing the person for reintegration.
It is also time to consider reforming the social security system for prisoners to facilitate employment contracts as a condition for reclassification.
In terms of health, they should also benefit from health care covered by the health care system, like any insured person.
Finally, some prisoners have been forgotten in this long legislative work: interned persons.
Ecolo therefore requests that the law on social defence examine the legal status applicable to them.
Guaranteeing exceptional use of preventive detention
The ever-increasing use of preventive imprisonment and the lengthening of its duration have resulted in persistent prison overcrowding, despite the construction of new prisons.
For Ecolo, it is necessary, in consultation with the judges and investigating courts, on the one hand, to limit the conditions of application of preventive detention to cases which do not authorise appropriate alternative measures and, on the other hand, to develop and invest in alternative measures to detention in order to make them effective and credible.
Ecolo also hopes that the rights of the person being questioned or charged will be strengthened in accordance with the case law of the European Court of Human Rights.
A bill has also been submitted to Parliament.
"This aims to improve the rights of the defence during the "pre-judgment" phase in the broad sense, by providing in particular for the presence of a lawyer during simple hearings and at the stage of issuing the arrest warrant."
Diversify criminal sanctions
Ecolo also proposes diversifying criminal sanctions and developing more restorative justice.
Beyond the community service introduced into the Penal Code in 2002, other new penalties must be able to replace detention when the persons concerned are capable of taking responsibility and wish to be rehabilitated.
Thus, the professional injunction (obligation of means and not of results), the obligation to provide service to the community, the obligation to take part in social reintegration projects, participation in social missions in Belgium... Ecolo also proposes that the confiscation penalty becomes an independent penalty.
It is indeed likely to have a significant deterrent effect, particularly for tax or economic offences.
Ecolo proposes to study on a larger scale another alternative solution which is Electronic Surveillance (ES), tested on several hundred people convicted in our country.
This practice is not suitable for everyone and also requires psychosocial support.
It is also very expensive.
But it seems to have a positive impact on non-recidivism and allows the convicted person not to be cut off from all social, emotional or even professional ties.
In any event, care must be taken to ensure that the SE is not an alternative to probation or a suspended sentence, but a genuine alternative to detention.
Furthermore, the involvement of private companies must be strictly limited to technical intervention.
In view of technological advances and current projects (example: electronic chip implanted under the skin), it is also urgent in Ecolo's eyes to organize a debate on the moral and ethical questions raised by electronic surveillance.
Evaluating drug incarceration policy
We must finally get out of the impasse of incarceration solely for drug use.
Whether drugs are the cause of the offences and the detention or whether consumption is a consequence of the detention, it seems important that all people who have an addiction problem or who could develop one can be taken care of and systematically monitored by specialist risk reduction services.
The issue of drug trafficking in prison is a problem that must be addressed frankly and without taboo.
Establish a legal basis for the detention of persons detained for acts of terrorism
On the specific issue of people detained for acts of terrorism, Ecolo is calling for a legal basis to be given to their detention regime, which is currently extremely harsh and sometimes even contrary to international recommendations.
Adapting family law to changes in society
Create a Family Court
Ecolo confirms its desire to see the creation of a Family Court bringing together all the skills in family matters, and forming a section of the Court of First Instance.
For Ecolo, this family court would be competent for all disputes related to a separation so that the entire procedure can be handled by the same court, in order to reduce the fragmentation, slowness and cost of separations.
Similarly, since youth protection issues are most often linked to questions of parenthood, questions relating to the 1965 law and the 1991 decree would also be settled by this court.
Likewise, the adoption procedure would find its place there.
Encourage family mediation
For Ecolo, it is appropriate to set up mediation structures that can intervene before the dispute reaches the courts, which makes it possible to avoid lengthy, costly procedures that often negatively affect personal relationships.
In particular, the intervention of mediators in the context of legal aid should be more adequately funded.
Addressing inequalities caused by alternating accommodation of children in the event of separation
Alternating accommodation of children in the event of parental separation creates unfair situations
which Ecolo proposes to resolve by filling existing gaps in the relevant legislation, such as the tax deduction of childcare costs or family allowances for children born from a new union.
Ensure rapid support for young people in danger or who have committed delinquent acts
The situations handled today by youth aid and the suffering of young people call into question society's way of functioning and the problems it creates.
Employment, education, housing, childhood, cultural policies, etc. can provide their own solutions to the inequalities they create.
Ecolo is in favour of alliances between these sectors and that of youth aid, in order to create the conditions for a general prevention policy which combats the factors of exclusion suffered by young people and children.
Reinvestment must be made in this area.
This is in fact the only sustainable way to avoid the current congestion of services which are incapable of ensuring, with the means at their disposal, rapid management of dangerous situations.
However, it would be unreasonable to neglect the curative aspect of youth assistance policy.
Today's social realities and the lengthening of waiting lists also require additional resources.
Addressing the lack of support for young people in difficulty before they become “delinquents”
Youth welfare advisors and directors regularly draw the attention of political leaders and the public to the excessive number of young people for whom a decision has been made but which cannot be carried out in the appropriate service, whether it be a youth welfare service, a medical-educational institute, a psychiatric hospital, a nursery, a foster family, etc.
The gaps noted are divided equally between family support and accommodation.
The unmet needs are particularly located in Hainaut, Brussels, Liège and Namur.
It is not uncommon for the young person and their family to wait three to nine months before the first support, which means that the help, although very necessary, is not provided early enough, with all the consequences that this delay can cause within these families.
Ecolo proposes, in consultation with the sector represented within the CAAJ89 and the CCAJ90, to adapt the support capacity to meet the needs of young people.
Care must remain accessible to young people and their families close to where they live.
Empowering youth judges to enforce decisions
The overhaul of the 1965 law on the care of young people who commit delinquency gives judges new means to avoid the spiral of delinquency.
Of all the means available, placement in a closed environment is the ultimate measure which is required as a last resort.
Ecolo supported the new directions given to the law and supports its educational nature, the only realistic path for our society, with the emphasis being placed on reparation for victims and recognition of mediation.
Today, we must give this law the means to be applied in all its aspects, and not just the most repressive ones, which do not always correspond to the personality of the young person, their situation and the act committed.
However, the only measure put in place by the outgoing government is the development of two new closed federal centres in Tongres and Saint-Hubert.
Ecolo believes it is necessary to also promote the other measures contained in the law.
The judge has eleven possible courses of action at his disposal.
Furthermore, Ecolo supports proposals aimed at making the decisions of the youth judge more informed.
To do this, Ecolo is in favour, within the framework of the creation of a Family Court, of formulas such as the provision of a multidisciplinary team to the youth judge.
but also that of the aldermanship, which would allow, in particular as is the case for the Labour Court, for cases to be heard and judged by courts composed of both a youth judge and one or two people from the youth assistance sector but not belonging to the judiciary.
Strengthen consultation and the development of global policies between the federal state and the communities in the care of juvenile offenders
The federal state and the Communities are in a state of mutual dependence since the youth judges are dependent on the resources made available to them by the Communities.
Conversely, the Communities are responsible for implementing court decisions taken on the basis of a law that they do not have the power to modify.
The authority that decides on the measure is therefore not the one responsible for financing it.
For Ecolo, it is therefore urgent to put in place a common strategy to combat delinquency between the federal State and the Communities, by strengthening collaboration between judges and the Communities, in order to ensure optimal management of the fight against juvenile delinquency.
This could be resolved within the framework of a cooperation agreement between the federal State and the Communities, similar to what is already being done more specifically for the implementation of the mediation measure proposed by the public prosecutor's office to a young offender and his victim.
89 District Council for Youth Assistance. 90 Community Youth Aid Council.
Improving general prevention measures to combat the causes of youth exclusion
Prevention is better than cure.
The outgoing federal government seems to have forgotten this adage, since it preferred to focus all its resources on the repressive aspect.
General prevention in the youth aid sector nevertheless aims to respond to the various forms of discrimination suffered by populations affected by a precarious economic, social and/or cultural situation.
This prevention work with young people and families is therefore essential.
This is why Ecolo is proposing to redeploy preventive policy.
Youth aid is today the receptacle for all the problems of our society.
Many of the difficult situations it supports actually originate from unequal policies implemented in other sectors.
Faced with this observation, it is important to see how to better respond, through networking with all the sectors concerned, to the precariousness of an increasingly large part of the population, to school dropouts and relegation, to the culture of overconsumption, etc.
However, too often, prevention policy is limited to play areas or sports areas for young people, to support or to “occupational” activities with a strictly security-based approach.
Thus, Ecolo proposes to redefine, with the field actors of youth aid, but also those of other sectors (education, childhood, youth, culture, sport, CPAS, Social Cohesion Plans, etc.), a new preventive policy which meets the challenges of our time.
More concretely, Ecolo proposes to systematically conclude collaboration protocols between these sectors which will thus define a new mode of collaboration between all sectors of the different levels of power.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Axis Living together, here and elsewhere Security Police Fire
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Security – Fire Police
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
The feeling of insecurity takes many forms.
It may be linked to delinquency, terrorism, the economic or social situation, the environment, health, road insecurity, etc.
Together, these forms create a global climate of uncertainty and diffuse anxiety, which pushes citizens to become increasingly distrustful and even withdrawn.
When examining surveys carried out on security issues, it is spontaneously the insecurity linked to car traffic which is most often cited first.
But on a daily basis, it is often the insecurity linked to delinquency against people and property which is highlighted and which is worrying.
Several incidents of great violence have recently resulted in unacceptable tragedies, particularly in Brussels, and have brought to the fore the need for in-depth work in this area.
For Ecolo, this insecurity and this feeling of insecurity must be taken seriously.
Quality of life is a whole and no attack on personal integrity can be accepted or trivialized.
Even if a "zero risk" society does not exist, crime and delinquency are not inevitable, any more than oil spills or unemployment.
They are also the result of societal choices.
Ensuring the effective exercise of the right to security, for everyone and everywhere, is an essential responsibility of public authorities.
Attacks on the safety of people and property take different forms: incivility, petty crime, racketeering;
but also domestic violence, of which women and children are particularly victims;
road insecurity;
damage to the environment and health;
or even serious organised crime, terrorism and financial crime.
The fight against all forms of insecurity must be done without naivety and without misleading the population: surveillance and repression are necessary but they cannot be the only responses.
In all these areas, the preservation of mutual trust and the protection of fundamental rights must remain a priority.
Working towards realistic solutions sometimes means going beyond “democracy”, listening to the police, the prosecution, local stakeholders, citizens, consulting criminologists.
The manipulation of the feeling of insecurity by certain politicians, surfing on the emotion and legitimate anxiety of the population, avoids addressing other factors of insecurity.
Our proposals are therefore based on two inseparable foundations: a preventive component and a repressive component.
They also address the police function which today requires specific skills and studied intervention techniques.
Finally, the public authorities also organise the response to other security problems, unfortunately also very real, via the fire services.
These services have been waiting for five years for a reform that has had great difficulty in being translated on the ground, as well as the adequate means to ensure the safety of citizens and also that of firefighters in operation.
Ecolo's proposals
Providing appropriate responses to different forms of insecurity
For Ecolo, public authorities must prevent and limit the risks of delinquency and act directly in the face of attacks on people and property, to combat feelings of impunity and insecurity and, when acts of aggression are nevertheless committed, provide a rapid, fair and proportionate response.
It is appropriate to develop a diversity of sanctions, emphasizing whenever possible those which are the most effective in preventing recidivism (more so, for example, than the sole penitentiary response which, in matters of minor crime, too often constitutes a school of crime);
those which favor repair;
Combating organised crime and violence against people as a priority
Priority must be given to the fight against organised crime and financial crime, which are real dangers for democracy.
This involves ensuring the resources and coordination of the various specialist services which fight against these serious crimes.
In terms of criminal sanctions, priority should be given to punishing attacks on people, particularly attacks on women and children.
Limit and strictly regulate the possession of firearms
Criminologists and associations agree that the number of firearms in circulation in a society statistically determines the level of gun violence, especially when these weapons are in the family environment.
Current events illustrate this too often when simple neighborhood conflicts, family disputes or situations of despair turn into tragedy because of the presence of a firearm.
Following the failure of the Onkelinx law, Ecolo wants to bring Belgian legislation into line with its European and international obligations.
The possession of firearms must be strictly limited to people who can justify a real legitimate reason (hunters, sport shooters, museums, professionals).
Once the legitimate reason has disappeared, the weapon must be registered with an authority or irreversibly deactivated.
Develop alternatives to repression, where possible and useful
In matters of incivility (graffiti, noise, etc.), municipalities must designate, as the law now allows them to do, ‘sanction’ officials who will relieve the police services.
Ecolo supported and obtained the introduction into the penal code of autonomous alternative sentences, allowing judges to choose alternatives to prison.
These measures combat the feeling of impunity, prevent reoffending, combat the victim's feeling of abandonment and ensure a visible and rapid reaction.
The use of these alternative penalties must be further developed and must necessarily go hand in hand with financial and personnel resources for the services which supervise these measures.
Developing a comprehensive approach to drugs
In the area of ​​drug addiction, environmentalists advocate a global approach focused above all on the objectives of health protection, prevention and the fight against addictions.
In the same spirit, they advocate the regulation of the consumption and distribution of soft drugs rather than their criminalization.
Improving the social contract and reducing inequalities
A security policy must above all seek to re-establish the social contract in its various dimensions.
Combating insecurity means first preventing it from occurring.
Prevention is, for example, deterrence.
Thus, a greater police presence on the streets (with precise mission assignments, collected after analysis of the situation in the neighborhoods and in consultation with the field) can help prevent certain people from taking action.
Prevention also involves trying to remedy the causes of delinquency and tackle its deep roots: education, culture, reduction of inequalities, employment and housing, regional planning, stimulation and regulation of economic activities in the collective interest.
This is why in debates on the means of the State, whether it is tax reform or corporate tax, environmentalists consider that we must favour choices which improve the quality of life in society rather than short-term selfishness.
It is up to politicians to act to change the trend, to bring the sense of community and solidarity back to the centre of debates, then to the centre of decisions.
In this context, regional and community policies must also lead concerted action, oriented towards repairing social ties, relying among other things on coordinated action by local services, local actors and associations, municipal services and CPAS.
Ensure the quality of life for all citizens
Urban renovation and improvement of the living environment must be supported, in coordinated interventions.
Feeling good in your neighborhood is reassuring, makes you want to participate in its maintenance and opens a virtuous circle that benefits everyone.
It is important to develop community, sporting and cultural life in a global way, rather than providing occasional support for specific sectors which give their beneficiaries the feeling of being second-class citizens.
Better coordination and support of prevention systems
Where prevention measures exist, increased coordination between municipalities, the federal state, communities and regions should be ensured.
Indeed, prevention policies have developed at all levels of power, sometimes mobilizing significant resources and also creating confusion and a dispersion of educational action, even competition between services, in search of a "clientele".
It is therefore necessary to draw inspiration from successful experiences to ensure that projects are sustainable, to emphasise the social and preventive aspects as well as collaboration between the various actors in the field (while respecting their ethics), and to ensure greater participation by beneficiaries and field workers in defining the objectives of the contracts.
Thus, the evolution of security contracts is positive in several cities;
It is also necessary to preserve the resources allocated to the Brussels districts by the "European summits" fund, the appropriate use of which helps to contribute to security in the broad sense.
It is also appropriate to stabilize, by complementary means, the social actors and actresses in their function and status, which will lead them to even more investments.
Acting with specific audiences and their needs in mind
Ecolo believes in the effectiveness of the specific work carried out by the associative network.
For example, with regard to people begging, school dropouts, the phenomenon of urban gangs, by setting up social cohesion projects.
Where possible, alternatives to confinement in IPPJ91 should be increased for young offenders, such as intensive monitoring in the living environment.
Access to security services and preventive training should be ensured for public transport users, shopkeepers, the elderly, etc.
Choosing a genuine community police force, at the heart of society
The police reform (integrated police at two levels, local and federal) had, among other things, the objective of an increased police presence on the streets, in direct service to the population, in particular by reducing the administrative workload of officers.
The evaluation of the 10 years of police reform provides a negative assessment: it has resulted in a more costly, less well-trained police force, with too much of its time taken up by administrative work.
The abolition of special police forces has placed very heavy tasks in the hands of the zones and the general reserve (transfer of prisoners, surveillance of stations, motorway policing).
The reduction in public budgets has weakened this fundamental mission of the State.
The Federal Reserve is no longer able to meet the needs.
On the ground, chaos, demotivation and anger among police personnel are real.
The specificities of certain urban areas appear not to have been taken into account;
This is the case of border municipalities which carry out joint actions with police officers from other countries, which generates additional costs.
It is therefore necessary that federal funding for this police reform be corrected on the basis of objective criteria.
To compensate for the deficits, we must also note an increasing privatization of security (guarding at public events, surveillance personnel, security centers, cash transport, etc.).
But for Ecolo, the State must keep its monopoly on the security of people and public order.
It’s a question of ethics, deontology and efficiency!
Completing the framework of police services in the Brussels Region
At present, the Brussels police zones are seriously understaffed:
approximately 800 police officers missing from a framework of just over 5,600 officers (i.e. almost 15%)!
No area has a complete framework, and only three reach the operational minimum.
The meager promises made by the Minister of the Interior to allow the recruitment of 175 agents could not be voted on before her party brought down the government.
Let us hope that the future government will follow through on this commitment.
The effort will have to be accompanied by additional measures, in terms of information and promotion of the police profession in Brussels, relaxation of linguistic requirements and financial support for their establishment in Brussels.
Establish a real community police force
Ecolo wants a "proximity" police model, that is to say a police force oriented towards the community, based on the needs of the population and their objective and subjective feelings of insecurity.
91 Public Youth Protection Institutions.
solutions ;
which attempts to identify the causes and triggers of conflict or crime;
which develops specific proactive actions (framed by standards) at the neighborhood level92.
Along the same lines, while efforts have been made in recent years through the hiring of social workers, there is still a need to improve the reception of the public in police stations, particularly for vulnerable people or those who have suffered an assault, particularly through training.
The police themselves are regularly confronted with acts of violence, family dramas, stress, and negative preconceptions linked to their role.
Organised psychological support can be useful in certain situations, as can an improvement in the image of the police.
Stabilize the workforce in Brussels and the recruitment of Brussels police officers
Brussels residents only represent 7.45% of the Region's police officers.
This situation is mainly explained by training and linguistic requirements, and sometimes poses problems of knowledge and contact with the field, as well as excessive mobility of staff.
Ecolo supports the pilot experiment carried out in four schools, in the 7th year of secondary school, preparing for security professions.
Significant awareness-raising efforts must therefore be made, particularly towards young people of foreign origin, who are under-represented within the Brussels police.
Democratically defining police priorities
At the local level, for the police to be the guardian of democracy and itself democratic, it is essential to define the priorities of police missions in a democratic manner in the zonal police councils and to ensure the transparency of its activities.
Ecolo proposes to encourage police councils to create meeting spaces with citizens, representatives of the police and the municipal council, to listen to what is happening in the municipality (road safety, mobility, conflicts, crime, regional planning, etc.), to "draw up a map of insecurity", develop proposals and inform the population more clearly.
As is the case in local councils, Ecolo also wants to generalise the right of citizens to question in police councils, as introduced in the Brussels-South police zone.
Establish clear ethical rules applicable to all security stakeholders
Police oversight should focus on effectiveness, ethics and policy options.
In this context, it is important to allow any agent who notices abuse of power, discrimination or racism in their workplace to report the facts to a trusted person.
Ecolo opposes the privatization of security and the proliferation of surveillance (prevention and security agents, private security, etc.) without a code of ethics and definition of clear and, above all, limited missions.
To do this, it is also necessary to activate the status and improve the training of urban stewards, APS93, park wardens... "figures of soft authority" as defined by the King Baudouin Foundation.
They bring a presence to the streets, recreate social ties in neighborhoods, promote the social reintegration of job seekers and carry out tasks that no longer need to be encountered by the police on the ground.
Provide a lucid response to the terrorist threat, but one that respects freedoms
Following the attacks of September 11, 2001, a battery of international and national regulations came into being.
Like the European Union, Belgium has in recent years adopted legislation aimed at improving the fight against terrorism and organised crime.
For Ecolo, while public authorities must be able to protect the population from all forms of violence, the fight against terrorism and crime cannot, however, jeopardize fundamental rights, such as respect for private life, freedom of expression and association.
However, several recent criminal cases illustrate the security abuses that legislation adopted in the fight against terrorism can lead to.
In Belgium, showing sympathy for anti-globalisation groups or organising peaceful actions can lead to prosecution for terrorism or criminal association, which is not acceptable.
Evaluating the law of 19 December 2003 relating to terrorist offences in Parliament
The so-called "anti-terrorist" laws must be evaluated and reviewed to avoid the abuses already observed, and to ensure absolute respect for the presumption of innocence and the fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution, such as freedom of expression and association.
The definitions given to the concepts of terrorist offence, membership of a terrorist group, or assistance in the commission of a terrorist offence are too vague and allow an extremely wide range of people and associations to be incriminated.
The role of the Federal Prosecutor's Office must be reviewed and subject to democratic control which respects its independence, for example by involving the Office of the Public Prosecutor or the Attorney General who normally has jurisdiction.
Marking specific research methods and use of personal data
The law legalizing the Special Research Methods (MPR) of the police services, further tightened by Minister Onkelinx in 2005, allows people suspected of belonging to a terrorist organization to be subjected to methods that are particularly intrusive in their private lives:
wiretapping, “discreet” surveillance, direct listening, interception and opening of mail, use of informants.
Partially annulled in June 2006 by the Constitutional Court, a new text had to be submitted.
It will be a matter not only of being vigilant about the content of the proposed amendments but also of requesting the evaluation of existing provisions.
The outgoing government has decided to adopt a similar legalisation targeting the intelligence services (State Security and General Military Intelligence Service) by submitting a voluminous bill relating to data collection methods for the secret services.
Fears and criticisms are increasing since the data collected by these services are, by definition, secret.
While it cannot be disputed that the secret services need to have this type of means to carry out their missions, Ecolo is demanding that safeguards be provided to prevent any infringement of fundamental freedoms and rights.
Especially since the invocation of reasons falling within the missions of the security and information services, such as the "safeguarding of essential elements of the scientific or economic potential" of the country, could suffice, as it stands, to pursue NGOs such as Greenpeace or unions, for example.
Finally, Belgium will soon transpose the European directive on data retention into Belgian law.
The directive requires internet and telephone service providers to retain their customers' "traffic data" for six months to two years.
The goal is to keep all this data available in the event of an organized crime investigation.
Ecolo is calling for a reasoned transposition into Belgian law, which should be the subject of an in-depth discussion in Parliament in order to define the necessary guidelines.
Achieving fire service reform for the protection of all
The Ghislenghien disaster tragically highlighted the need for a thorough reform of the fire services, in order to ensure the safety of citizens, as well as shorter and uniform response times.
Since the end of 2005, the Federal Government has had the report of the Paulus Commission, made up of field actors, whose proposals largely match Ecolo's options.
The mayors are ready to define the best conditions for implementation but have never received the necessary budget projections to do so.
To date, in certain Walloon areas, the legal minimum number of firefighters has not been reached and some services do not have any professional firefighters.
Volunteers do not benefit from a pension scheme, their status as professionals is determined by the mayors and therefore varies even in salaries.
In Brussels, the requirements of linguistic legislation are a paralysing factor for SIAMU, which is why Ecolo is calling for a rationalisation of this legislation, which would greatly simplify the operation of the Brussels service for the benefit of all Brussels residents.
Increase federal funding for fire services
After the disaster in Liège, a budget of €32 million was promised to the rescue services.
This minimalist commitment does not allow the municipalities to finance this reform alone;
Many of them are also paying the price of police reform and therefore cannot support reform without budgetary assurance.
For Ecolo, federal funding for fire service reform must be an objective of the next legislature.
The budgetary neutrality of the reform for the municipalities must be guaranteed and the financing of fire services must tend towards parity between the State and local authorities.
With regard to the Brussels fire service (SIAMU), Ecolo is calling for the federal state to make a financial contribution commensurate with the challenges, based on a mechanism equivalent to that set up for all the emergency zones and also taking into account the important role played by the SIAMU beyond the 19 municipalities.
Improving the quality of services within the framework of the reform
The implementation of the reform must ensure:
or the strengthening of emergency service teams;
o the improvement and harmonization of the status of firefighters, both volunteers and non-volunteers (including the recognition of this profession as a high-risk occupation);
or the organization of practical training for firefighters (basic and continuing training, with credit hours);
or the organization of psychological support and specific end-of-career support;
or the presence of at least 20% of professional firefighters, including corps leaders, in each department;
or the updating of the standards of the royal decree of 1967, in order to take into account the evolution of industrial, natural, military and domestic risks;
or the regular renewal of equipment, which is currently insufficient and obsolete.
Going beyond sublocalism for better intervention effectiveness
For Ecolo, the objective of identical security and protection for all citizens, within 12 minutes and in any location, is achievable, as long as we agree to transfer responsibilities from the municipalities to areas with ad hoc legal status to be created, which will not prevent local involvement.
Unfortunately, some municipalities are resisting this loss of responsibility and decision-making power, but also political practices from another era (partisan appointments, misuse of equipment, etc.).
However, this resistance cannot undermine the need for quality service to the population, nor the definition of zones according to objective criteria.
Prioritize strengthening industrial and nuclear security
Many accidents could certainly have been avoided by a more systematic policy of prevention of industrial risks in general and by a better knowledge of the pipes of all kinds which abound in the basements.
Priority must therefore be given to the prevention of industrial risks, by drawing up a register of underground areas, by the regular organisation of 'disaster' exercises, by closer contacts between companies and emergency services, by specific training of fire services, by better information for the population, by optimal coordination of institutions and authorities (particularly in border areas), and with particular attention to the nuclear risk.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Axis Living together, here and elsewhere Social issues
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Social issues
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
Belgium, like all of our contemporary Western societies, is characterised in particular by its cultural pluralism and its diversity of emotional and sexual orientation.
People with diverse behaviors, values ​​and ideas, and diverse cultures, traditions and religions live together there.
While some agree in recognizing the richness of this diversity, it nonetheless raises pressing questions and leads to debates and demands, tensions and oppositions which are all challenges for our society.
How can we deal with all these differences that now characterize it without seeing it break up into a multitude of subgroups or particular communities?
The challenge is to recognize the difference without giving up on a common project.
It is about thinking of a balanced way of managing differences and the demands relating to them.
The encounter with otherness, whatever it may be, can legitimately prove difficult and give rise to misunderstandings, which become problematic when they occupy all the space in our view of the other and thus obscure everything that brings us together.
Above all, we must seek ways to improve the reception and integration channels in our country and address the real situations of discrimination experienced by people of foreign origin, particularly in terms of employment and housing.
Integration must be understood as the desire to fight against all exclusions.
Moreover, it is often around the religious question that misunderstandings currently crystallize, making dialogue on this issue sensitive and ever more delicate.
Ecolo believes that it is necessary, with great respect and finesse, to establish the middle ground between rights and obligations which can sometimes come into conflict, and to respect each in its beliefs and traditions, through respect by each of democratic rights and principles.
The legitimate aspiration of everyone, Belgian or person of foreign origin, is to flourish and live harmoniously with others.
It is in this society of “living together” and shared citizenship that Ecolo is part of.
Besides this, Ecolo has always played a pioneering role in improving the rights of minorities, lesbian, gay, trans (LGBT) people are no exception.
Today, even if mentalities have evolved, the suicide rate among young gays and lesbians remains worrying.
It is still difficult for some to live their homosexual identity on a daily basis.
Discriminatory attitudes must be firmly combated.
In addition, notable discriminatory rules still exist, such as the ban on homosexuals donating blood.
Finally, uncertainties, even anxieties, are being felt in the face of certain scientific and technological developments which should constantly call for debates and informed democratic choices.
However, these debates are still dormant on many themes:
child abandonment, cord blood banks, genetic testing, nanotechnologies, evaluation of the practice of voluntary termination of pregnancy (IVG), end-of-life support and euthanasia, etc.
A huge project must be continued by the democratic power, with the participation of all those who are concerned.
Ecolo's proposals
Building a truly intercultural society
Belgium has long prided itself on building an intercultural society94 rather than a multicultural one.
It must be recognised, however, that the integration policies implemented have not always enabled new arrivals and their children (or even their grandchildren) to construct a satisfactory identity for themselves.
Discrimination in employment is still a reality, as are "ghetto" neighbourhoods bringing together families and people in precarious situations, to whom social mobility is not accessible as it is to people of Belgian origin95.
In recent months, the debate has focused on Islam and its visibility in the public sphere, and more particularly on the wearing of the headscarf.
For Ecolo, it is urgent to stop the escalation aimed at making the question of the headscarf an electoral issue, in order to be able to look lucidly and more broadly at the difficulties linked to "living together"
and step up the fight against all forms of discrimination.
Reform and empower regional integration policies, recognize minorities and develop a reception policy
Although integration policies depend mainly on the regional level, Ecolo nevertheless points out that it is time to develop them and grant them the necessary means to meet their objectives, after consultation and with the collaboration of the Regional Integration Centres, the Brussels Centre for Intercultural Action and the public administrations concerned.
The recognition of minorities, particularly at the level of the associative network, allows each member of a minority to become involved as a full citizen and to be associated with political life.
The process of recognition, far from supporting identity withdrawal, on the contrary promotes pride in what one is, the desire to have it recognized and therefore interculturality.
This requires cross-functional coordination between the various stakeholders and appropriate funding, so that the minority associative world can exist.
This also makes it possible to provide political power with diverse interlocutors within these minorities.
Finally, it is urgent to develop the reception of migrants.
Each new arrival (whether in the context of family reunification, asylum law or labour law) must be received and supported by a service which will aim, in a positive approach, to familiarise them with our society, its institutions, its values ​​and the rights and duties that they imply.
He will also direct him towards French language learning courses (currently very insufficient), as it is true that speaking and then mastering the language of the host country is the first step towards integration.
Strengthening the fight against discrimination in hiring
Awareness campaigns should be set up to change mentalities, but also to develop positive actions (control over hiring procedures, tax incentives to hire job seekers from areas very affected by underemployment, application of the anti-discrimination law through the use of the situation test, etc.).
94 An intercultural society is not only multicultural, it is not just the addition of layers of cultures, but it is based on exchange, dialogue and solidarity. 95 No less than 55.6% of people of Moroccan origin and 58.9% of people of Turkish origin have an income below the European poverty threshold of €777 per month. For native Belgians, the figure is 10.16% (King Baudouin Foundation).
Ecolo wants access to public sector jobs at all levels of government to be open to all people of foreign origin, including those who are nationals of a country that is not a member of the European Union, as is the case in the Brussels Region and as the French Community and Wallonia are preparing to do on our initiative.
Ecolo also advocates the use of statistics relating to the cultural origin of people (called ethnic or cultural statistics) in the field of employment (hiring and professional careers).
In fact, indirect discrimination clearly persists (for example, when it affects people of foreign origin who are naturalised, or Belgian children born to emigrant parents).
To measure these discriminations, set up corrections and evaluate their effectiveness, the provision of tools to objectify discrimination is essential, while preserving the principles of confidentiality and respect for private life.
Organize the exercise of the right to wear a religious or philosophical symbol
The question of religious or philosophical signs is particularly complex and sensitive.
In particular, the question of the Islamic headscarf seems for several years to have crystallized all the tensions and misunderstandings linked to cultural and religious difference.
For Ecolo, it is dangerous and irrelevant to move away from the principles of individual freedom and religious freedom and the principle of gender equality guaranteed by the Belgian Constitution, the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and international Conventions, with regard to the wearing of religious and philosophical symbols, and more particularly the headscarf.
A pure and simple ban would certainly not provide a solution to the difficulties posed and would, on the contrary, risk leading to a situation of exclusion and withdrawal.
Beyond that, it would put our country in breach of international texts which protect fundamental rights.
However, it is appropriate to examine how to organize the exercise of this right in the specific contexts of school and administration.
School must above all be a place of inclusion and learning emancipation.
It is also necessary to fight against any ghettoization.
In this context, Ecolo is currently considering how to support free choice, provided that the young woman (or, reciprocally, the young man) is able to make it and do it in complete freedom.
The concept of "capacity for discernment" entails a ban in primary and secondary education, up to a level of education which should be defined collectively, subject to the obligation to respect the defined rules.
This supervised authorization would thus be accompanied, by decree, by a set of duties, including, in particular, the obligation to follow the entire school program (science classes, physical education, etc.) and extracurricular activities, respect for "living together" (mixed education, etc.) and the prohibition of any attitude of proselytism.
This draft text will naturally have to be submitted to the Council of State for its opinion.
At the same time, Ecolo condemns any pressure aimed at making a young person wear a philosophical or religious symbol against their will.
Every young person must be able to denounce these pressures and be protected from them.
Some services (mediation, AMO, family planning centers, etc.) have the capacity to establish dialogue within a family.
One of the roles of the school is to inform young people about the existence of such services.
As far as the civil service is concerned, Ecolo does not want to oppose the principle of religious freedom to that of the obligation of neutrality in the service provided to the citizen by a civil servant.
A general ban on the wearing of religious or philosophical symbols in the civil service appears excessive in light of constitutional rights and would certainly represent additional discrimination in hiring for women who often already suffer too much from it.
On the other hand, Ecolo supports the ban on the wearing of religious symbols for professions invested with a function or a role of authority for the public or a part of the public (police, justice, army, teachers, etc.), since it is necessary to ensure the impartiality but also the appearance of impartiality of the public service.
Finally, Ecolo unambiguously condemns the wearing of the full veil, a symbol of oppression.
Ecolo notes the opposition to the principle of a general ban, expressed in particular by Amnesty and the Human Rights League in Belgium.
This is why Ecolo wants a real reflection on the general ban on the full veil to make this ban consistent with fundamental rights.
The examination of the text by the Senate should be an opportunity to request an opinion from the Council of State.
Thanks to this opinion, the final text will thus be legally reliable, unassailable, and included in the rights and duties enshrined in our fundamental freedoms.
Achieving equal treatment between religions
As soon as religions meet the expectations of the Constitution regarding religions and philosophies, they must, for Ecolo, be treated like other recognized religions and organized secularism, with equal rights and duties.
More generally, Ecolo wants a reform of the current system of financing religions in order to treat all religious and non-religious communities equally.
In this sense, Ecolo is in favour of a public consultation carried out every five years;
The result of the survey would establish the relative importance of each cult or philosophical movement.
Allows everyone to assume their emotional and sexual identity
The rights of homosexuals have seen significant improvements in recent years.
After the legal cohabitation contract and marriage, the right to adoption was granted to same-sex parents in May 2006.
However, many conservatives are still resisting these real legislative advances.
Although acceptance of sexual difference has gained ground, Belgian society has not yet reached the stage of comprehensive tolerance.
A large part of the population for whom heterosexuality remains the norm is still reluctant and expresses it through verbal and physical abuse which is still frequent.
Extend parental leave to the mother's wife
Same-sex marriage is now recognized by law, but not all the modalities of heterosexual marriage have been extended to it.
Therefore, in the case of a birth in a lesbian couple, it is necessary to extend parental leave to the mother's wife.
Today, only the spouse of a heterosexual couple can benefit from 10 days of leave with continued pay.
When a lesbian mother gives birth, she has the same need to be supported and surrounded by her partner.
Allow access to the recognition procedure to establish the co-parent’s parentage
Currently, the partner of the mother giving birth to a child through Medically Assisted Procreation (MAP) must, in order to legally exist in the child's life, complete the same process as any adopter (preparation, going to court, psychosocial assessment, high costs, etc.).
Ecolo proposes to allow the co-parent to recognize the child, either via recognition "on the stomach" (before birth), or via recognition at the municipality, like all parents.
Ecolo also wants to see generalised preparation for this parenthood organised by certain hospital services for parents of all genders resorting to medically assisted procreation.
Allow homosexuals who wish to do so to donate blood
The Red Cross currently refuses blood donations from homosexuals, arguing that there are higher numbers of AIDS and other STD patients in this population.
This reasoning is homophobic and unnecessarily discriminatory.
While Ecolo obviously believes that any heterosexual or homosexual person with multiple sexual partners should be excluded from donating blood, a homosexual who meets all the health criteria should be allowed to help sick people to recover or survive, like any other donor.
Respecting individual choices regarding gender reassignment
The new law governing sex changes now imposes very heavy administrative and medical procedures on transsexuals.
Ecolo wants a rapid evaluation of this new system, in dialogue with those on the ground.
Current rules require the intervention of a multidisciplinary team and the monitoring of very standardized medicalized and heavy steps.
For Ecolo, it is above all the acceptance of individual paths and choices and the simplification of administrative procedures which must take precedence in this matter.
Gender stereotypes not only poison relationships between men and women, but affect all people whose gender identity does not fit into sexist and binary norms.
To be truly effective, equality policies must include the fight against gender stereotypes.
Develop public information campaigns on sexual identity
Outside of schools, where activities relating to sexual orientation are necessary, to support the development of a more tolerant social climate, health promotion campaigns relating to sexual identity must be disseminated to the general public.
It is also necessary to continue to organise diversity training for magistrates, the federal police, labour inspectors and social partners and to extend it to all public administrations.
As well as ensuring that we work with the opinion vectors that are the media so that minority people can be made visible in all roles: as experts, journalists, and not just as witnesses.
Strengthening the ethical framework for science, technology and medicine
Over the decades, medical practice has become increasingly technical.
But above all, the use of biomedical techniques has sometimes been directed towards ends other than therapeutic ones, notably for reasons of personal convenience or financial interests.
The technoscientific model tends to dominate the development of medicine.
But is everything that is technically possible ethically and socially acceptable?
For example, the ever-increasing knowledge of the human genome requires us to reaffirm that fundamental rights, social protection, integrity and the dignity of the person cannot suffer from a discriminatory attitude based on this knowledge.
Assisted reproduction techniques, for their part, are changing traditions of filiation and family composition, and are added to the sociological developments of the family, which are constantly changing.
Finally, it seems normal that issues which the legislator considered a few years ago, such as abortion or euthanasia, require regular evaluations and sometimes adjustments or considerations on their expansion.
Parliament and the Government have eminent responsibilities to reconcile as best as possible the possibilities offered by advances in science and the protection of fundamental human rights.
They must ensure informed participation of citizens, in particular through a public and pluralist debate, taking into account the state of knowledge, schools of thought, value systems, historical and cultural contexts and philosophical and religious convictions.
Overall, Ecolo will naturally continue to develop an open and calm approach to these sensitive issues, rejecting the logic of taboo, as well as any possible escalation of one or the other approach.
Beyond the guidelines contained in our program and through which we seek to reach a consensus position after in-depth study, analysis and debate, it should be remembered that each elected official is left with freedom of conscience on these ethical questions.
Strengthening support for expectant mothers in distress
There is a tendency to question the current system, wanting to remove any legal link between mother and child.
For Ecolo, this system works, and no figures highlight the tragedies linked to the lack of secrecy (unaccompanied abandonments, infanticides, etc.).
We cannot deny the distress of some women and young girls faced with their pregnancy, but we believe that it is mainly preventive work to provide information on existing services that will help reduce their number, and not a change in the law to allow total secrecy.
Ecolo is therefore opposed to changes to the law aimed at preventing the adopted child from legitimately searching for his or her natural parentage and would like to see a consolidation of budgetary support for specialist services supporting mothers in distress, in order to enable them to carry out preventive information work.
Looking into the use of surrogacy
The lack of legislation in Belgium leads in some cases to unacceptable commercialisation of this act of procreation for others and does not prevent several dozen cases annually in approved fertility centres.
After a serious assessment of the situation, the democratic debate must be continued, with emphasis on the rights of all parties concerned, with particular attention to the rights of the unborn child and the memorial link, that is to say the possibility that will be offered to him to know his origins, his history, his lineage.
Update and strengthen the law on voluntary termination of pregnancy
The 20th anniversary of the law on the decriminalisation of abortion in Belgium is a reminder of the threats hanging over this essential achievement for women.
The debate on abortion cannot be about being for or against abortion, which must remain a last resort in the event of contraception failure, but about the right of each woman to freely decide whether or not to accept an unwanted pregnancy.
Ecolo therefore wishes to reaffirm the need to preserve the right to abortion (without denying the essential place to be given to prevention in matters of emotional and sexual life), and wants the law to be updated based on the assessments carried out.
It will therefore have to allow for the prohibition of the abusive use of the “abortion centre” label by centres which do not practice it;
it will ensure that the resources allocated to family planning centres, which are currently saturated by demand, are consolidated;
it will develop the means of information promoting the use of the “morning after pill”;
it will focus on promoting access to abortion for women who do not have mutual insurance;
Finally, it will ensure that data collection on the reasons for choosing abortion and the number of weeks of pregnancy is improved in order to improve prevention.
Ecolo is finally calling for legislation at the European Union level to ensure women's fundamental rights, namely the right to equality, health, freedom of conscience and respect for sexual and reproductive rights.
Evaluating the euthanasia law and strengthening palliative care
Eight years after the law was passed, several issues that were not explored in depth during the 2002 debates are resurfacing.
For Ecolo, the debate on (access to) euthanasia must be continued and broadened on the basis of the evaluation of previous years and ensuring that any regression of the existing text is avoided.
Regulating the availability of genetic testing
To date, no specific legislation prohibits or regulates the direct sale of genetic tests to individuals, even over the Internet.
And this is despite the fact that there are laboratories in Belgium approved to carry out these tests with bioethical supervision and personalized support.
It is therefore appropriate to regulate the distribution of such tests and to ensure that consumers are informed about them.
In matters of recognition of parentage – which goes beyond the medical field alone – only tests carried out by approved laboratories, with support ensuring protection of the child, respect for privacy and consent of the parties, should allow the matter to be brought before the courts.
Strengthen laws regarding tissue, cell and cord banks
Ecolo considers that the commercialization of living things, including human beings, is unacceptable in principle and wants the logic that presided over the establishment of blood banks to also prevail in the following cases:
to define the status of stem cells extracted from cord blood and include this status in the 1994 law on blood and blood derivatives;
specify in the 1986 law that the removal of the umbilical cord is carried out in compliance with the law relating to organ removal;
to create a public cord blood bank with a ban on private commercial banking (in any case, collection and allocation must remain public).
Submit the development of the use of electronic chips to parliamentary debate
Often, proposals relating to the installation of chips, surveillance cameras, etc.
are formulated with a concern, real or imagined, of improving public safety or of responding to the challenge of administrative simplification thanks to technological advances.
However, these developments are not without danger and are taking place without Parliament ever having taken up the overall debate.
For Ecolo, it is urgent to open the debate after a detailed evaluation of the systems already in place, and to legislate before any new decision.
Evaluating the ethics of the development of nanotechnologies and their societal impacts
While nanotechnologies and nanoproducts can represent an opportunity in terms of research development, their consumption can also seem unreasonable.
Before these products are placed on the market, serious studies proving their safety and showing their societal benefit must be carried out.
The emergence of nanotechnologies also raises many ethical questions which must be the subject of democratic debate (for example within a parliamentary office for technological assessment).
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Axis Living together, here and elsewhere Europe International relations Development cooperation Defense
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Europe – International relations – Development cooperation Defense
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
In a globalized world, the harmful economic, social, environmental and cultural effects of liberalization and deregulation policies within and between States,
combined with the absence of real conflict prevention policies and
The failures of the international community to restore peace are the cause of disastrous situations.
In this context, Ecolo intends to advance its vision of European and global governance and international security which:
ofonde its principles on universal respect for fundamental freedoms and the conquest of social, economic, cultural and environmental rights;
dares to base itself on an international economic system at the service of humanity;
is a guarantor of food sovereignty in both the North and the South;
tends towards a better balance between countries of the North and the South;
fails to put in place the international policies necessary for a balanced transition towards a mode of development that is more respectful of the planet's environmental limits;
promotes the development of democracy as a vector of human development and a prerequisite for economic development;
privileges the prevention and peaceful resolution of conflicts;
ensures gender equality and free choice of sexual orientation;
make migration policies more consistent with respect for human rights and development objectives96.
For Ecolo, a profound reform of European and global governance is the only way to respond effectively to the multiple crises shaking the planet, leading to an increase in poverty and social exclusion and the loss of natural resources.
Finally, in the context of the upcoming state reform, Ecolo firmly reaffirms that foreign affairs, defence and development cooperation must remain an immovable foundation of the federal state's competences.
Furthermore, Ecolo advocates for greater coordination, synergy and complementarity between these three international skills of our country.
96 The common immigration policy within the European Union is dominated by a utilitarian and repressive imperative. A true Copernican reversal must replace the question of how to control human flows to make them compatible with our social models, with that of the policies to be implemented to reconcile social protection with increased mobility of people within the European Union and between the European Union and the rest of the world. For more information, see the Asylum – Migrations Chapter of the 2010 programmatic platform.
Ecolo's proposals
Defending a resolutely federalist perspective of the European Union97
Having largely achieved the integration of their market, after the economic and financial crisis and more particularly its recent developments which directly threaten the survival of the euro and have put European economies on the brink of the abyss, Europeans and their leaders are today faced with a simple but decisive choice:
If they want to emerge from the crisis on a high note and give us a future that matches our potential, there is no other way than deeper and accelerated political integration.
This integration is inseparable from the establishment of a genuine European economic government, without which the European Union will be condemned to economic decline.
For the European Greens, this governance must be based on six pillars.
Sustainable framework for public expenditure, strengthened surveillance of macroeconomic developments and counter-cyclical coordination of budgetary policies
These measures involve a revision of the Stability and Growth Pact in order to use, beyond the sole indicators of deficit and public debt, a wider range of indicators of macroeconomic sustainability (indicators such as private debt, the current account balance and real exchange rates which give a broader vision of the internal and external imbalances of the Member States).
In doing so, they make it possible to initiate coordinated, better-informed preventive and corrective actions, which concern both deficit and surplus countries.
The recent proposals made by the Commission constitute a first step in this direction.
In addition, the sustainable management of public expenditure requires the implementation of coordinated counter-cyclical macroeconomic policies aimed at combating the accumulation of internal and external macroeconomic imbalances and, more particularly, the mobilisation of European savings towards sustainable public investments that create quality jobs.
Tax harmonization
If balanced public finances are a condition for economic stability, we cannot, as both the Commission and the European Central Bank (ECB) do, limit ourselves to working on the expenditure side: the revenue side is just as essential.
Whether it is the establishment of a tax on financial transactions, a special contribution from the banking sector (bank levy),
the establishment of a common consolidated tax base accompanied by a minimum corporate tax rate,
or the fight against tax evasion, only a common approach will allow each of the 27 Member States to find the means for their policies and ensure the maintenance of social cohesion.
Strong regulation of financial markets
The establishment of a European regulatory framework capable of preserving the public good of financial stability requires the capacity to:
prevention before cure, by penalizing speculation and, in general, the negative externalities produced by the financial markets on the basis of the “polluter pays” principle (European tax on financial transactions;
progressive tax on the banking sector based on the size of the institution and excluding deposits, targeting excessive short-term indebtedness;
joint supervision and reinforced prudential standards targeting all financial players, instruments and markets,
and in particular the shadow banking system, hedge/alternative funds and derivatives and capital flows to and from tax and regulatory havens;
structural reforms of financial markets so that banks return to their traditional role of collecting savings and granting credit to the real economy);
97 For all our proposals concerning the European Union, see Ecolo’s 2009 programme, Book VI, Chapter 1 “Europe”.
o-intervene before things get worse, by strengthening the control and intervention powers of national authorities and future European supervisory authorities, including the possibility of prohibiting or limiting the use of dangerous products and behaviour;
In this respect, the Council must align itself with the position adopted by the European Parliament, which shows the right direction in terms of financial supervision;
o-heal effectively and through fair burden sharing, by addressing in solidarity the failures of cross-border and systemic financial institutions,
in order to limit as much as possible the use of public resources and therefore to make the shareholders and creditors contribute first and respectively, before the taxpayer.
The stabilisation mechanism decided as a matter of extreme urgency on 10 May 2010 by the Council to deal with the crisis within the eurozone should, in this perspective, ultimately lead to the establishment of a genuine European Monetary Fund capable of providing emergency aid to defaulting countries,
without bringing them to their knees through disproportionate “IMF-style” economic conditionalities which affect the most vulnerable and social cohesion.
With this in mind, it is essential to adopt a framework directive on services of general interest, which constitutes a tool of choice for limiting the impact of competition rules on these services.
Increased own resources for the European Union
It should be noted that with an aggregate public deficit of 6% of GDP, an aggregate stock of public debt of 88.5% of GDP, which is largely held by Europeans themselves, the fundamentals of the EU as a whole are healthier than those of, for example, the USA (10% and 98% respectively, with debt held half by non-residents, including China).
This means that the EU as an actor has a strong potential for credibility with the markets.
In the collective interest of the Member States, it seems obvious that the EU must have both a reinforced budget, funded by its own resources (tax revenues and borrowing capacity, including Eurobonds), which it would put at the service of common objectives, in particular its EU2020 strategy.
The launch of a European Green New Deal
The EU2020 strategy must be an opportunity to put Europe at the forefront of the sustainable transformation of our development model.
The two challenges of the 21st century are to reconcile it with the physical limits of the planet (climate and depletion of resources) and to ensure social justice within and between our societies.
The financial crisis we are experiencing cannot obscure these challenges;
Responding to it is not only an obligation but also an opportunity: this is where the employment sources of this century lie.
This Green New Deal will have to be financed not only through an increase in the European budget, but also through the granting of interest-free loans from the European Investment Bank (EIB) to those involved in this ecological conversion (in particular local authorities).
This presupposes that the EIB, in order to finance such an operation, is able to refinance itself at zero rate from the European Central Bank.
This Green New Deal also involves the implementation of large-scale innovative projects, such as the creation of a European Renewable Energy Community (ERENE).
This common economic governance is not a chimera: work is already underway in each of the five pillars.
All that is needed is political will to accelerate the pace of their achievement.
Putting international institutions at the service of peace and prevention
Environmentalists favour a security strategy that is intended to be global and integrates environmental problems and those linked to climate change, the scarcity of resources and conflicts over their distribution, violations of human rights, fair trade, etc.
Implementing UN reform
For Ecolo, the UN must play, at the global level, this role of regulator of the different forces present, and this, according to guidelines defined by the general interest of all citizens.
In this respect, Ecolo believes that a review of its operating method is essential and must in particular be based on a democratization of the Security Council (end of veto rights and enlargement to new States),
increased participation of civil society, more transparent decisions,
a reflection on the establishment of a United Nations parliamentary assembly,
an increased presence of women in decision-making and conflict resolution processes,
an increased role in disarmament, “human security” and conflict resolution.
Ensuring NATO's subordination to the UN
In recent years, NATO has undergone several developments that the Greens consider problematic and have never been subject to real democratic control or parliamentary approval.
In this context, Ecolo intends to:
dares to position itself against the transformation of NATO into a global military alliance not subordinate to the UN;
to reaffirm its desire to dismantle all American nuclear weapons present on Belgian and European soil and to see the NPT respected;
to demand that NATO adhere strictly to the missions assigned to it in its founding charter;
to oppose the transformation of NATO into a place of political decision-making;
This role should be given to the EU, while NATO would be a simple "military executive" subordinate to the UN.
In this configuration, the European Union as a civilian force would become the main place of political decision-making, although any intervention would require a mandate from the United Nations Security Council.
In this context, a gradual dissolution of NATO seems to us to be conceivable in the long term98.
Regulating the global arms trade
The disparity and gaps in national arms legislation, as well as the lack of control and transparency on the trade and flow of arms at the international level, give rise to numerous illegal transfers to armed groups, thus fuelling conflicts in many regions of the world (Chad, Burma, Somalia, Colombia, etc.) and consequently serious human rights violations.
Ecolo therefore joins the demands for the adoption of an international treaty on the arms trade by all member states of the United Nations.
Belgium must also continue and intensify its action for the universal application of the ban on anti-personnel mines and cluster munitions.
98 For more information: see “From NATO to a European security and defence policy” adopted by the Federation Council on 18 December 2009.
Promoting global economic governance in the service of sustainable development
In the service of the interests of the countries of the North, the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) must be profoundly reformed in order to promote the necessary global governance in the service of sustainable development.
In order to make international trade an integral part of human security, social justice and world peace, it is necessary to act on the internal functioning of these institutions, radically reorient the policies assigned to them and eventually organize their regrouping under the authority of the UN.
Reforming the WTO and rebuilding the international financial architecture
For Ecolo, the economic governance system must be managed by a set of regional institutions placed under the aegis of the UN Economic and Social Council.
On the one hand, the WTO suffers from a real lack of transparency and democratic functioning.
Its reform should aim to improve:
the functioning of the dispute settlement mechanism within the WTO;
the internal decision-making process of the WTO (including through the restoration of the principle that all delegations have access to all negotiations, through analytical support for weaker delegations, through the admission, in particular, of NGOs to meetings of the General Council, etc.);
the relationship between the WTO and UN bodies.
On the other hand, Ecolo is arguing for Belgium to explicitly include the following specifications99:
o-the reform of governance and the democratization of the World Bank (WB) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), notably by increasing the weight of less wealthy States in their decision-making processes.
In the same vein, Ecolo advocates that Belgium's representativeness at the World Bank and the IMF be ensured through co-representation of finance and development cooperation;
o-substantial reform of the exchange rate system, in order to promote the stability of these rates and limit speculative transactions;
o-the establishment of a regulatory and financial supervision framework at the multilateral level;
o-the reform of international accounting standards for transnational firms in order to ensure transparent monitoring “country by country”;
o-strict supervision of transactions with tax havens and strengthening the fight against offshore locations, in particular through the adoption of a binding code of conduct at European and international level;
supervision of institutional investors in the energy and food product markets;
o-the introduction of a set of financial flow taxation mechanisms as tools for the redistribution of global wealth and the stabilization of speculative flows;
o-the establishment of binding standards for transnational investors at the United Nations level;
the Tripartite Declaration of the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the OECD Guidelines on Transnational Enterprises form the basis of a regulatory framework with effective dispute resolution and compensation mechanisms100;
o-the establishment of binding multilateral mechanisms for the repatriation of stolen public property;
99 All of these elements are the subject of a position paper available on the website www.ecolo.be 100 In this context, the mechanisms for monitoring corporate social responsibility must also include instruments to combat direct and indirect discrimination based on gender in employment.
o-the establishment of a multilateral forum for development cooperation (instead of the OECD) under the aegis of the UN, as a place for defining norms, procedures and standards in terms of development aid;
o-the redefinition of the debt sustainability framework of international financial institutions under the aegis of the United Nations through a vast transnational public process involving the participation of governments of developing countries and civil society organizations, including women's defense organizations;
o-promoting the adoption of measures to combat vulture funds – which speculate on sovereign debts – by advocating, in particular, the prohibition of the transfer of debts to poor countries without their prior consent;
o-the establishment of an international debt arbitration mechanism (debt workout mechanism) and a multilateral framework for responsible lending (responsible lending framework) accepted by lenders and borrowers, to get out of the current situation, where donors play the role of judge and jury within bodies such as the Paris Club;
o-the abandonment of economic conditionalities attached to public development aid and concessional loans from international financial institutions, while ensuring that mechanisms are in place to control the allocation of loaned funds (fight against corruption);
o-the strengthening of cross-border cooperation in tax matters and the establishment of an intergovernmental organization on taxation under the aegis of the United Nations, replacing the group of experts on international tax cooperation;
Ecolo also wants to see the establishment, within the United Nations Economic and Social Council, of a binding code of conduct to combat tax evasion;
o-the integration of the fundamental standards of the ILO and its agenda for decent work in the diagnostic missions and reports of international financial institutions;
o-the establishment of multilateral incentive instruments for the promotion of clean technology transfers;
like the recent guidelines implemented within the World Health Organization (WHO) in terms of intellectual property and research and development,
Belgium must proactively promote the exploration of innovative mechanisms for technology transfers necessary for the promotion of global public goods,
including mechanisms decoupling the prices of goods such as medicines and renewable technologies with innovation financing101;
o-the adoption of alternative and gender-based indicators of sustainable well-being in order to have a broader overview than that of the classic GDP/capita indicator.
Reform Belgian and European trade policy and make economic agreements subject to social and environmental criteria
Trade and investment promotion is one of the most important aspects of international policy, but also one of those with the most direct consequences for populations.
In order for these trade and investment policies to serve sustainable development at the global level, they should be subject to strict compliance with social and environmental standards and, more generally, to compliance with the requirements of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
It is important to ensure compliance with a series of principles:
o-put an end to the EU's "Global Europe" agenda, where the short-term and ideologically biased objective of "competitiveness" at all costs obliterates and contradicts any other effective action in terms of environmental protection or strengthening social rights;
o-refuse any expansion of the powers of the Common Commercial Policy (CCP) without prior strengthening of multilateral institutions and standards in terms of environmental protection and strengthening of social rights;
orstrengthen social and environmental clauses in free trade agreements, which remain generally unbalanced and unfair agreements;
To do this, it is essential:
- to make these clauses binding and ensure their traceability;
- to establish mechanisms for settling disputes and providing monetary compensation in the event of an infringement;
- establish mechanisms for civil society participation in their evaluation;
o-ensure compliance with ILO international labour standards by transnational companies, their subsidiaries, subcontractors, production sites, etc., in particular by establishing a principle of transparency (obligation to provide accounts via annual reports, etc.);
o-include the notion of “collective preferences” in commercial strategies and place it at the centre of the PCC’s objectives;
o-put on the political agenda of European and national institutions the implementation of “trade qualification”, that is to say, the possibility of implementing trade restriction measures (tariff and non-tariff) on the basis of respect for the environment and social rights;
along the same lines, the EU must unilaterally defend and include in its negotiating mandate within the WTO the concept of production and processing methods based on the right to distinguish – and therefore discriminate – between similar or even identical products on the basis of production methods and modes (of companies, their subcontractors and suppliers) that comply with social and environmental standards;
Any levies resulting from these measures should be returned to developing countries in the form of development aid;
o-establish a legal definition of fair trade, in order to provide a legal basis to facilitate the entry of new players into this sector and to promote its principles within the framework of policies for access to public markets;
o-promote “good practices” in “alternative” trade across all commercial relations, such as the positive experience of fair trade;
also to promote a European directive containing minimum standards for fair trade and public procurement;
o-match the relaunch of the WTO Doha Development Round with a new mandate based on genuine special and differential treatment through which developing countries would be able to define the speed and extent of the liberalisation processes of their economies;
This new mandate must explicitly include the principle of non-reciprocity (cf.
infra) and must promote the elimination of agricultural export subsidies by 2013 at the latest and of mechanisms for managing agricultural prices and supply;
o-set a moratorium on the conclusion of new free trade agreements which will be lifted when multilateral and bilateral agreements have integrated binding social and environmental standards;
the EU faces the major challenge of radically reducing its greenhouse gas emissions in the coming years and decades, which implies a relocation of the economy and compliance with very stringent environmental and social standards;
in these circumstances, it is not in the EU's interest to offer economic partners such as China, South Korea or India comparative advantages in investment or public procurement if the latter do not apply internationally recognised social and environmental standards;
o-not force any country in the Africa-Caribbean-Pacific (ACP) region to sign interim agreements if they have not done so, nor to go beyond the interim Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) already signed if they do not wish to do so;
Numerous reports and studies have highlighted the potentially disastrous repercussions of the current form of EPAs that the EU has been trying to impose for several years on the countries of the Africa-Caribbean-Pacific region.
In the meantime, conditions comparable to GSP+102 should be granted to partner countries.
102 Generalised preference scheme proposed by the EU to partner countries subject to the conditions of adoption of a set of international instruments.
Increase the quantity and improve the quality of official development assistance
Despite a series of obstacles (lack of resources, lack of predictability of aid, conditionality, etc.) when it is of good quality, aid works and constitutes a real lever for strengthening the capacities necessary to respond to social needs and emancipatory aspirations.
Ecolo believes that it is essential to implement a voluntary and ambitious Belgian cooperation policy.
This policy must in particular:
o-provide the means to respect Belgium’s international commitments;
to respond to the global challenges of combating poverty and inequality, and to ensure the financing of global public goods;
ensure its consistency with all aspects of government action, particularly with trade and environmental policies.
In addition to several proposals developed below, Ecolo proposes in particular to make decent work an objective of Belgian development cooperation,
to put an end to the artificial inflation of aid, to broaden the legal objectives of Belgian cooperation,
to supervise the allocation of aid to improve its effectiveness and ensure the autonomy of indirect bilateral cooperation103.
Increase aid to the poorest countries and exceed 0.7% of GNI devoted to official aid
In 2009, Belgium devoted 0.55% of its GNI to Official Development Assistance (ODA), an increase compared to 2008 (0.48%).
ODA is expected to continue to increase significantly in 2010, partly thanks to the exceptional debt relief operation for the DRC planned for this year.
However, it is not certain that Belgium will meet its commitment to reach the target of 0.7% of GNI by 2010.
Therefore, Ecolo hopes that the commitment to achieve this objective will be fulfilled by 2010 and will become structural in the years to come.
To do this, he proposes that a plan be implemented to gradually eliminate the various accounting artifices:
debt relief, reception and repatriation costs for refugee candidates...
Alongside the need to increase the resources allocated to international solidarity, Ecolo also intends to ensure the improvement of the quality of ODA.
Indeed, increasing aid spending is only justified if its effectiveness is guaranteed.
In this perspective, Ecolo hopes that Belgium will make significant progress in the following areas:
the continued untying of its aid;
improving its predictability;
its alignment with the priorities defined by the partner country;
Cancel developing countries' debt and prevent unsustainable debt
Planned for 2010, the DRC debt relief operation would lead to a significant reduction in the stock of debts held by Belgium against less developed countries.
In this scenario, the debts of three other countries in conflict or post-conflict situations, namely Sudan (€232 million), Côte d'Ivoire (€217 million) and Togo (€82 million) would concentrate the bulk of the remaining debts to the Least Developed Countries (LDCs).
The aggregate debts of other LDCs weigh as much as that of Togo.
103 These proposals can be consulted in the 2009 Ecolo programme, Book VI, Chapter 3, “Development cooperation”.
In order to continue the effort to reduce the burden, Ecolo submitted a bill in 2010 on the cancellation of the debts of developing countries and the establishment of an audit committee for debts held by Belgium.
This notably provides for the following three measures: the establishment of a moratorium with a freeze on interest on the repayment of loans granted by Belgium before 1 January 2009 to LDCs, HIPCs (Heavily Indebted Poor Countries) and other developing countries with a substantial current account deficit;
the creation of a compensation fund for the National Office of Debt Collection (OND);
as well as the establishment of an ad hoc committee of experts responsible, on the one hand, for drawing up a Belgian charter for responsible lending and, on the other hand, for drawing up country-by-country audit reports on the debts held by Belgium vis-à-vis developing countries.
At the same time, ECOLO also advocates for the recognition of the concepts of illegitimate and odious debt, climate justice and ecological debt.
Ensuring the right to food sovereignty
Ecolo wants Belgium to develop a policy to defend, in the North as well as in the South, the regulation of agriculture and trade aimed at promoting food sovereignty.
For Ecolo, Belgium must, within the framework of international negotiations, oppose agreements, conventions and other mechanisms which deprive the authorities of a country of the possibility of defending agricultural policies ensuring its food security.
Ecolo supports the group of African countries which are defending at the WTO the right to form producer groups, with the aim of setting remunerative agricultural prices for tropical products (tea, coffee, cocoa, cotton, etc.) and setting up regional supply management mechanisms;
Such groupings would bring stability and improvement of living conditions.
It is therefore appropriate to support the emergence, consolidation and development of local and regional markets.
At the same time, Belgium has committed to increasing the share of agriculture in the Belgian development cooperation budget to 15% by 2015.
This commitment must be respected and used to support the development of family subsistence farming, agrarian reform programs, as well as new experiences developed in the South, such as urban agriculture, which contribute to greater autonomy in terms of food security while promoting the socio-economic cohesion of communities.
Finally, we must be vigilant with the production of biofuels for transport, which could put the food self-sufficiency of populations in the South at risk.
Developing decentralized cooperation
It is essential to strengthen the instruments of direct cooperation and to provide the means to achieve the Millennium Development Goals which are primarily a local matter (agriculture, education, health, access to water, etc.).
Ecolo wants the Belgian government to implement the resolution adopted by the European Parliament on the role of local authorities in development.
Belgium must also exert pressure at European level so that this new approach is considered as one of the challenges of reform and aid effectiveness and that the local level becomes a priority sector of cooperation.
Mobilizing additional resources for adaptation and mitigation of climate change
For Ecolo, the climate remains a fundamental global political issue which also requires action within the framework of development cooperation.
Climate change brings a new form of inequality to the already existing ones.
104 For more information, see Ecolo’s 2009 programme, Book VI, Chapter 3 “Development cooperation”.
(representing 77% of historical carbon emissions) are not the first to be affected by climate change (the Asian megadeltas, sub-Saharan Africa, the Caribbean, small island states).
The fight against this injustice requires a drastic reduction in greenhouse gases in developed countries;
but also by providing mechanisms for mitigating and adapting to climate change for developing countries.
For these countries, Ecolo supports the provision of structural, public and additional means to development aid to the tune of €110 billion at global level (€35 billion at European level) starting in 2013.
These funds must be managed within the United Nations.
Ensuring recognition of climate refugees
The impact of climate change is being felt in many parts of the world and is affecting the most vulnerable first and foremost.
The populations of the South are the first to be affected by these disruptions which will lead to significant population movements (internal and international) in the years to come.
It is therefore essential to recognise a specific status for climate refugees at national and international level.
Belgium will have to advocate in particular for the creation of an international fund, the contribution of which could be determined on the basis of the principle of responsibility of countries in the phenomenon of climate change.
The resources thus released should, among other things, enable the resettlement of displaced persons and provide them with sufficient means of subsistence.
On the other hand, since national or even regional recognition is not sufficient, Ecolo is arguing for a structure (agency within the United Nations, integration into the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees or other) to be set up at the global level.
Furthermore, Ecolo supports the broadening of the criteria of the Geneva Convention relating to the status of refugees to environmental degradation and refugees due to global warming.
Strengthening the cross-cutting integration of gender equality105
Despite the many declarations of intent making gender equality an essential dimension of any human development policy, there is a marked tendency towards the dilution of the principle of gender equality in development cooperation policies.
As the contribution "Women's Consultation on Financing for Development" states, women in developing countries typically work for very low wages - if they are paid at all - and mostly in the informal sector, yet bear a disproportionate burden of financial risks;
and this, in particular through their role as managers of household finances, in a context where social security and protection systems for the poorest are non-existent or inadequate.
In this context, Ecolo intends to strengthen the cross-cutting integration of gender equality in Belgian cooperation policy.
A first step towards this would be to ensure that at least half of the additional resources allocated to development aid in the coming years have real relevance and impact in terms of gender equality.
Along the same lines, it is a question of legally adopting targets accompanied by gender-specific impact indicators and qualitative indicators106 of the programmes and projects financed by cooperation.
Other indicators and incentive mechanisms relating to the use of gender budgeting and the use of sex-disaggregated data would also constitute appropriate means of verification to better measure the effective and transversal integration of gender equality in cooperation policies.
105 For more information, see the chapter “Equality between Women and Men” of Ecolo’s 2010 programmatic platform.106 Drawing in particular on the qualitative indicators developed by the Federal Commission for Women and Development.
On the other hand, in the face of the many conservative currents that endanger women's rights to decide on their sexual and reproductive lives,
Particular attention should be paid to financing programmes aimed at strengthening sexual education, access to information and effective contraceptive methods for all in partner countries.
Belgium must also provide specific and strengthened support for the ratification and implementation of the Women's Rights Protocol, adopted by the African Union, which marks remarkable progress in the recognition of women's rights and their alignment with international objectives.
Conclude a Europe-Africa pact for the environment and climate
Today, the link between environmental degradation and the worsening of poverty and the responsibility of Westernized countries no longer needs to be demonstrated (climate change, reduction of biodiversity, pressure from multinationals for the use of GMOs, etc.).
This situation urgently calls for the development of a partnership between the North and the South to provide responses to these common challenges and issues.
More specifically, Ecolo is proposing a Europe-Africa pact for sustainable development based on three pillars of development:
economic, social and environmental.
The establishment of the African Union today offers a real opportunity to do this.
This pact should, among other things, cover intellectual property and the protection of living organisms, protection mechanisms and adapted legislation, the African Union model law on GMOs, research and citizen innovation, ecological public research, access to and management of natural resources, monitoring and follow-up mechanisms for international commitments, both on the part of countries in the North and the South.
Developing a common foreign, security and defence policy focused on conflict prevention and peace
For an effective and operational defense that meets the challenges of the 21st century
Unlike in the past, military instruments no longer constitute the central element of national security.
The role of civil and political crisis management tools continues to grow in importance.
For Ecolo, the participation of the Belgian armed forces in international peacekeeping missions must be done within the framework of a clear international mandate from the United Nations (UN) and correspond to Belgium's democratic options.
At the same time, it is important to build a common European defence and security policy, focused on conflict prevention, with genuine common diplomacy, the gradual establishment of a European army, the rejection of nuclear weapons and an integrated vision of security.
Furthermore, decision-making autonomy in relation to NATO must be clearly affirmed.
We are also considering the future role of the Belgian armed forces in this context.
Ecolo therefore supports a deeper integration of the armed forces within the European Union, so as to obtain more results with a constant overall European defence budget.
In recent years, progress has been made on several points (pilot training with France, naval integration with the Netherlands, etc.) but much can still be done (heavy naval and air logistics, etc.).
The Belgian army has been undergoing reforms for around twenty years, but recent months have highlighted the extent to which Defence is undergoing a major transformation, following the outgoing Minister of Defence's desire to implement his plan called "the finalisation of the transformation".
Ecolo is attentive to ensuring that the transformation of Defense is carried out in compliance with the rights of personnel and with a view to economies of scale.
With regard to the purpose of the Belgian Army, Ecolo will ensure that the latter directs its investment and restructuring choices in a balanced manner and will ensure strict compliance with the United Nations Charter in the context of missions abroad and that choices are made according to its areas of expertise.
Ecolo would like to see the Defense restrict its areas of operation, by focusing on the places in the world where its expertise is most useful (mine clearance, peacekeeping, sea rescue, natural disasters, training of foreign armies, etc.).
For Ecolo, Belgium could gradually disengage from certain missions (mainly in Afghanistan) to concentrate on its preferred areas of action, in line with the size of its defense...
To this end, Ecolo is calling in particular for increased democratic control by Parliament over foreign and defence policy:
entrust to Parliament any decision relating to the implementation of military forces, in a framework of maintaining or restoring peace, according to modalities to be determined and allow Parliament to be able to give its prior agreement to any engagement of the armed forces, with the exception of rare cases of extreme urgency, which require the sending of soldiers within extremely short time frames (24 to 48 hours).
Finally, Defence must also be able to respond to needs in the event of natural disasters and provide support and, where appropriate, security for humanitarian aid.
These are very delicate debates given the symbolism of the army, but which could provide a glimpse of a potential reconversion of national defense, towards a model that is less wasteful of public resources, more respectful of the workers and families concerned, and more useful on a societal level.
Orienting European security and defence policy towards prevention
For Ecolo, the Belgian government must above all defend a Europe seen as a civil power.
We need to achieve an "integrated European security policy" that brings together all the foreign and security policy instruments available to European states.
Concretely, the ESDP must aim to strengthen multilateral cooperation and international institutions such as the United Nations.
Decision-making autonomy from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) must be clearly affirmed and put into practice.
Energy policy is also part of security policy.
To limit the growing tensions around dwindling non-renewable resources, we need an energy policy that ensures Europe's security of supply through more intensive use of renewable energy sources, more efficient technologies and decentralised supply systems.
Beyond this security, the EU must also take into account the interests of the weakest countries and the impacts on the environment.
Arms control and non-proliferation are essential instruments for conflict prevention.
The EU's many individual initiatives must therefore be brought together within a comprehensive strategy aimed at delivering on disarmament commitments and revitalising arms control and disarmament negotiations on the global stage.
The European Code of Good Conduct must be transposed into a binding text applicable to all Member States, with the European Parliament having the right to control its application.
Civilian crisis management must remain one of the cornerstones of the EU.
Military instruments can complement or support civilian mechanisms, but they can never replace them.
In order to strengthen the EU's civilian intervention capabilities, the concept of a "European Civilian Peace Corps", developed by the European Greens, must be implemented as a flexible space for pooling civilian peace resources.
European security policy must also remain a reflection of a human rights policy, including in particular firm action to prevent genocides.
Intervention in the face of the likelihood or occurrence of genocide must not be paralyzed by diplomacy, as is the case in Darfur.
In its multilateral relations, Europe must adopt clear language on the issue of humanitarian intervention.
An "integrated European security policy" must also be reflected in Europe's institutional arrangements.
In view of the challenges ahead in terms of security and foreign policy, an effective link must be established between Europe's advisory and decision-making structures.
This observation applies both to the various national ministries and to the coordination between the European Commission and the Council.
Europe's access to security policy instruments, recourse to the intergovernmental method and the communitarisation of specific areas imply very varied forms of parliamentary control.
Here too, the link should be strengthened in order to guarantee that MEPs and national parliamentarians can exercise their responsibilities.
The European Parliament must have the power to formulate binding guidelines in matters relating to foreign policy.
Ensuring compliance with the Non-Proliferation Treaty
Arms control and non-proliferation are essential instruments for conflict prevention.
The EU's many individual initiatives must therefore be brought together within a comprehensive strategy aimed at delivering on disarmament commitments and revitalising arms control and disarmament negotiations on the global stage.
Ecolo also advocates for a Europe free of nuclear weapons.
Support efforts for prevention, conflict resolution and reconstruction and ensure the strengthening of democracy and respect for international law
For environmentalists, a peace policy and European security and defence policies cannot be dissociated from other instruments of EU external action such as development cooperation or trade policies,
such as the treaties establishing “facilities” for organic or multilateral trade exchanges (ABI or EPA, currently very unequal) as well as other community policies on the environment, energy, development, agriculture, fisheries and human rights...
Making peace and development in Central Africa an international priority
At a time when Central Africa is the object of increasing covetousness, particularly for its natural resources, and is characterized by a situation of great instability, it is time to put this region at the center of the international agenda with the objective of reestablishing peace and development with and in the service of the local populations.
As the DRC prepares to celebrate 50 years of independence, the resumption of fighting in 2009 in the east of the country and in the west in the Equateur region bears witness to deep instability.
For Ecolo, the Belgian government must therefore work with its European partners for the security of populations and the fight against impunity in the region.
This involves, first of all, adapting the mandate of the United Nations Organization Mission in Congo (MONUC)107, in dialogue with the Congolese authorities in order, in particular, to put an end to the violence in the East of the DRC,
especially towards populations, women and children (sexual violence and recruitment of child soldiers)
while strengthening the legitimacy of the government's authority over the territory.
In this sense, our country must support the strengthening of democratic institutions, as well as the decentralization process and continue its military cooperation with the Congolese State, to support the integration process and strengthen the capacity of the national army.
In addition to the fight against impunity, it is appropriate to support the joint strengthening of the traditional system of local justice and a modern and independent judicial system.
It is also essential to enforce the Nairobi agreements of September 2007 in which Rwanda committed itself not to support armed gangs in Congo.
Therefore, any new diplomatic initiative cannot lead to the questioning of previous agreements or the legitimization of warlords.
Furthermore, in order to enable the DRC and other countries in the region to mobilize the resources necessary for their development, it is essential to cancel their external debt, conduct an audit of the odious debt and protect them from the attack of "vulture funds" and other unscrupulous creditors.
Beyond stabilization, the protection of natural resources and ecosystems also represents a major challenge for the development of the region.
Ecolo is calling in particular for Belgium to support international initiatives (FLEGT, REDD, etc.), as well as for the revision of contracts (mining, forestry, land) to put an end to pillaging and ensure that local populations benefit fully from the exploitation of the region's natural resources.
It is also essential to regulate the import of goods containing minerals from conflict zones in Central Africa.
The international community must also support the DRC in order to recover full sovereignty over its natural resources.
Finally, Belgium must also continue its dialogue and support for Burundi, which is currently entering a crucial electoral cycle to enable it to definitively turn the page on long years of civil war.
The same goes for Rwanda where our country should continue to support the fight against rural poverty and for democratic openness.
Ecolo therefore insists that the international community make peace and development in Central Africa an absolute priority.
For environmentalists, these developments must be defined by the countries themselves, in conjunction with civil society and with the participation of populations, and particularly women, in the life of their region.
Driving a change in strategy for operations in Afghanistan
Ecolo has long believed that the war in Afghanistan cannot be won militarily.
Today, many high-level military and civilian voices are reaching the same conclusion.
The gradual reorganization of the Taliban and their allies, who have gone on the counter-offensive, has led to numerous bloody blunders, mainly on the part of the American air forces.
The lack of psychology and knowledge of local customs on the part of American soldiers in this ultra-conservative traditional society did the rest, and gradually tipped the majority of the Afghan population into a hostile position towards the allied forces, considered an occupying army.
107 The DRC is requesting a gradual withdrawal of MONUC. The mandate is currently under review and a new mandate is expected to come into effect at the end of June. It should be the result of a balance between peace keeping (in the east) and peace building (in the rest of the country).
Ecolo wants to rebalance the efforts undertaken in Afghanistan in favour of development, and in particular to re-establish civil cooperation there (the ratio of development expenditure to military expenditure is currently 1 to 14).
Ecolo believes that several measures should in any case be taken:
to promote a diplomatic and political logic aimed at making contact with a part of the insurgents who could rally to the Government;
ensure better representation, at all levels of power, of the different ethnic groups and in particular of the Pashtuns, currently under-represented in favour of the Tajiks;
to accelerate the development and reconstruction of the country in order to regain the confidence of local populations;
to favour a global approach to the situation coordinated by the UN in order to ensure security as much as possible, to re-establish stability, but also to combat drug trafficking and corruption;
omitting to establish a professional, non-corrupt Afghan army that respects human rights, which will gradually take over from the foreign troops on the ground, even if the “Afghanization” strategy carried out at the time by the USSR did not prevent the fall of the regime that they had put in place;
Modify the undemocratic strategy pursued by NATO, specify the duration and rules of engagement, and define an exit strategy;
to avoid as much as possible allied military “blunders”;
grant democratic control bodies, including the Federal Parliament, decision-making and control powers with regard to the sending of troops and Belgian military missions abroad, in the interests of transparency and democratic legitimacy;
o emphasize the role of the Afghan Government and local political leaders in resolving the situation and moving towards the rule of law, and the commitment of the international community and the Afghan Government to improve governance, human rights and the security of the population, particularly women and girls;
to consider the pure and simple withdrawal of Belgian troops if these conditions were not ultimately met.
Relaunching the Middle East Peace Process
The political situation in the Middle East has deteriorated considerably in recent years.
For Ecolo, the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the construction of peace constitute one of the keys to the stabilization of the region.
The liberation and decolonization of the occupied territories remain central elements in the resolution of the conflict.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the necessary end to the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza are part of a general defence of the rights to self-determination of all peoples in the region and the right of all societies (in the Middle East as elsewhere) to exercise their fundamental freedoms and to democratically elect their representatives.
Ecolo bases its assessment of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on UN resolutions.
On the one hand, Ecolo shares the Palestinian demand, based on international legality, to establish a Palestinian state on all the territories occupied since 1967 by Israel.
On the other hand, it is appropriate to support Israel's right to exist as a sovereign state.
Ecolo believes that the Belgian Government must take initiatives to demand:
an immediate end to Israel's violations of international law and international humanitarian law in Gaza and the West Bank, as a precondition for any enhancement of Israel's status in its relations with the European Union or for Israel's membership of the OECD;
an immediate cessation of rocket fire and acts of terrorism by Palestinian armed groups;
a complete halt (before dismantling) of Jewish settlement colonization in the West Bank (including East Jerusalem), and the withdrawal of the Israeli army;
the lifting of the embargo and all restrictions imposed on Gaza;
the dismantling of the separation wall, in accordance with the opinion of 9 July 2004 of the International Court of Justice;
the deployment of an international observation and interposition force in the Occupied Territories;
a rigorous evaluation (currently lacking) of the cooperation agreements between Israel and the EU and the adoption of the measures that will be required following this evaluation;
Israel's accession to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT);
a return as soon as possible to the method previously used by the European Union and the international community to finance the Palestinian Authority108.
Staying alert to “forgotten crises”
Many conflicts, crises, human rights violations tend to be forgotten:
Darfur, Ivory Coast, Ethiopia, Sudan, Sahara, Liberia, Burma, Tibet, Sri Lanka, Mali, Niger, Nagorno Karabakh, Transnistria, Uighurs, Haiti, Guatemala, Bolivia, Colombia, Honduras… not, or no longer, the subject of media hype or the attention of political decision-makers.
Lack of strategic interests, concerns about maintaining good diplomatic relations or the cost of interventions are often the basis of this disinterest.
However, many situations are alarming and risk in turn being a source of instability and future conflicts, hence the importance of not marginalizing these populations.
In any case, it is appropriate to recognise and support the essential role of NGOs which, when the attention of decision-makers and the public is focused elsewhere, are there to provide assistance to people who suffer daily from hunger, disease and the dozens of ignored conflicts whose main victims are civilians.
Protecting minorities
From a prevention perspective, it is a question of tackling upstream the causes which provoke wars, conflicts and democratic instability.
An often underestimated factor is the situation of minorities present in many parts of the world.
These minorities, whose existence is sometimes totally unknown to the general public or even to the political world, are subject to significant cultural, social, political or economic discrimination, and often find their identity denied.
The recognition of minorities in their right to existence and dignity is essential, in particular with a view to promoting a multicultural environment.
Recognition, dialogue, participation in all aspects of social, economic and cultural life, combined with strengthened regional cooperation, are of essential importance in preventing ethnic or racial conflicts.
Protecting the environment to prevent armed conflict and also protecting the environment in times of armed conflict
The scarcity of natural resources is the source of many present and future conflicts, a situation which risks worsening with climate change.
One of the solutions to avoid conflicts related to access to resources is obviously the development of a strategy of independence from oil and other limited resources.
A sustainable, reliable and cost-effective energy supply is therefore vital for the proper functioning of any economy.
When it cannot be avoided, in addition to the human misery it causes, armed conflict also leads to environmental devastation and poses lasting threats to the resources and living conditions of populations.
Although there are legal provisions for environmental protection in times of conflict, they are not yet effective.
Ecolo wishes to highlight the link between conflicts and environmental destruction (increased food insecurity, destruction of natural and energy resources, humanitarian and ecological devastation) and proposes:
to ensure the prevention and resolution of conflicts in order to facilitate the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals, particularly the objective of reducing extreme poverty and hunger, as well as the objective of preserving the environment;
to implement a strategy of independence from limited energies;
108 The new indirect aid mechanism (Temporary International Mechanism) adopted by the Quartet has demonstrated its inability to address the serious humanitarian crisis currently underway in the territories.
o-to promote sustainable agriculture and rural development,
strengthening the role of local communities in the management of natural resources, and ensuring the right to food, as elements likely to play a decisive role in the prevention of armed conflicts;
o-to assess the environmental impacts of conflicts on the basis of an “environmental assessment” according to a set of indicators to be defined,
in order to be able to plan pre- and post-conflict actions and anticipate humanitarian and reconstruction needs, but also the policies to be implemented upstream;
o-to establish processes for the prevention and mitigation of the environmental impacts of armed conflicts, as well as post-conflict development and peacekeeping;
o-to introduce the notion of “ecocide” into international conventions.
Addressing security abuses within the European Union
Since the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty, the EU has gradually equipped itself with a set of legal instruments aimed at building a common policy on justice and home affairs.
It thus aimed to extend and complete the Community acquis on freedom of movement and to make the EU a "common area of ​​freedom, security and justice".
This common policy now covers a whole series of essential areas, including EU citizenship and the free movement of people;
immigration, visa and asylum policy;
judicial and police cooperation in civil and criminal matters;
the fight against discrimination;
the fight against crime and terrorism.
In parallel with the development of these instruments, the European Parliament has gradually become co-legislator of a significant part of these policies.
The security and repressive excesses that are taking place in Europe have multiplied in the space of just a few years.
This is evidenced by: the adoption of the “return” directive;
the development of two new framework decisions on the fight against terrorism109 and on the processing of personal data in the context of judicial and police cooperation;
the introduction of biometrics as a tool for identifying and controlling the migratory movements of nationals of third countries, and soon (2009-2011), of all travellers entering or leaving the EU;
the transit of CIA prison flights through a good half of the member states between 2002 and 2006.
It is necessary to combat this proliferation of social control devices and to transform this space into an effective instrument for the protection of fundamental rights.
and to strengthen democratic control of European institutions and governments.
109 For more information, see the “Justice” chapter of Ecolo’s 2010 programmatic platform.
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010 Axis Living together, here and elsewhere Asylum Migrations
Ecolo electoral platform Federal elections of June 13, 2010
Asylum Migrations
Ecolo's current situation and analysis
While the Arcenciel majority had made possible, thanks to the participation of Ecolo, an operation to regularise more than 50,000 undocumented immigrants, enshrined in law, as well as a simplification of the procedures for access to Belgian nationality, the federal governments which have followed it since then have adopted a security-based attitude in terms of migration policy.
After a year of procrastination, they finally put a regularization policy in place, but within an unstable framework, based on an "instruction" which was, moreover, cancelled by the Council of State.
Attesting to this security attitude, in particular:
priority given to the expulsion of foreigners;
the tightening of conditions for family reunification;
automatic suspicions of a sham marriage as soon as one of the future spouses does not have a legal residence permit;
the restriction of the possibilities of acquiring Belgian nationality and a tendency towards tightening the conditions for obtaining naturalization;
the very restrictive application of subsidiary protection110 transposed into Belgian law.
Since 2000, the European Union has also been characterised by an extremely security-based migration policy.
This is how we have seen the creation and extension of closed centres for people in an irregular situation, the increase in expulsion measures, restrictions in the granting of the right to asylum, the establishment of increased police cooperation at European level (Schengen agreements, SIS, VIS, Eurodac, FRONTEX systems, the adoption of a "return" directive).
This security policy for unwanted migrants is, however, accompanied by a welcoming migration policy for “chosen” migrants, embodied by the “blue card” directive111.
From the point of view of its objectives alone, this policy is a failure since it does not lead to a reduction in migratory flows, since it reinforces illegal immigration and the influence of human trafficking networks.
The "global approach" desired by the European Union, which aims to combine security and co-development, in reality focuses only on the first part.
Europe and its Member States are therefore unable to consider migration phenomena as a positive contribution that is part of the natural history of humanity, and are not looking into the causes of migration:
distribution and access to resources and income, our economic and trade policies (including EPAs), access to healthcare, environmental degradation, etc.
110 The law of 15 September 2006 amending the law of 15 December 1980 on access to the territory, residence, establishment and removal of foreigners transposes in particular Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29/04/2004 on minimum standards relating to the conditions that third-country nationals or stateless persons must fulfil to be eligible for refugee status or persons who, for other reasons, need international protection. 111 The "blue card" directive targets highly qualified workers. The aim is to facilitate the arrival of brains in the EU... to the detriment of the countries of origin which will lose these workers that they have trained. The directive does not explain in any way the efforts made or to be made, or the dialogues initiated for the compensations planned for the countries of origin which lose their qualified workers.
Ecolo considers with the European Greens that the approach to migration issues must be that of a Europe:
capable of ensuring active solidarity between North and South and between West and East, as well as a consolidation of the fundamental and social rights of individuals;
who comes out of this logic where almost everything circulates in this globalized world – capital, information, services, international executives, qualified workers except human beings in search of a better life, who form the only exception to the principle;
who understands that immigration chosen according to economic needs is another form of plundering of developing countries.
Ecolo's proposals
Ecolo is committed, in synergy with the European Greens, to implementing another migration policy on a European and national scale.
Ecolo and the European Greens are in favour of developing a common migration and asylum policy which harmonises national legislation from the top down based on the standards and practices which are most protective of the rights of migrants and asylum seekers.
Decriminalize migration policy and consider it in a cross-cutting manner
Current migratory movements, whether economic or political, are first and foremost the consequence of world disorders, inequalities, and the absence of justice and democracy on the planet112.
The European Union must recognise its share of responsibility for these imbalances.
To do this, it must tackle inequalities and adapt its trade, international and cooperation policies113 accordingly, in order to promote the development of the migrants' countries of origin.
It must also recognise itself as a land of asylum and welcome for these migrants114 and tackle the causes of the imbalances rather than the consequences.
She must finally stop using cooperation as blackmail:
It must stop imposing conditions for the readmission of nationals of countries of the South within the framework of economic partnership agreements.
Within the European Union, Belgium must work in this direction.
Create a Migration Committee
Ecolo proposes the creation, within the Federal Parliament and similar to what exists in terms of monitoring intelligence services or police services, of a Permanent Migration Committee (Committee M), responsible for monitoring the bodies and institutions competent in matters of asylum and foreigners' policy.
It would ensure that these bodies respect the rights that Belgian and international regulations confer on foreigners.
112 Neither undergone nor chosen, 75 proposals for a lucid and considered immigration policy, Causes Communes 51/January-February 2007, p.5. 113 See our proposals in the International Relations and Development Cooperation Chapter on this subject.114 The UNHCR estimates that only 1% of refugees are welcomed by Western countries. 99% of people fleeing war or famine find refuge in the South!
Eliminate closed centres
Closed centres have not always existed.
They were designed during the 90s.
Since then, they have become a key element of security policies regarding asylum.
These centres have no place in a democracy worthy of the name.
Ecolo therefore advocates for their total abolition and supports any approach towards a ban on confinement measures:
In addition to its human consequences, official and independent studies highlight the cost of such a policy, and above all the fact that the extension of detention has no impact on return rates, which remain roughly the same whether the detention takes place for ten days or for many months.
It can therefore be concluded that the tendency to extend the duration of detention in administrative detention camps essentially reflects the desire to send a signal to public opinion.
Abolish double punishment
A foreigner who has incurred a criminal conviction remains today threatened by the legislation of expulsion and banishment, even if this legislation was already partially modified a few years ago.
This measure constitutes a form of institutional xenophobia which Ecolo intends to put an end to.
Considering migration policy in a cross-cutting manner
For Ecolo, both within the European Union and in Belgium, it is essential to ensure consultation between the different Governments, FPSs and levels of power competent in matters of migration,
and this in order to ensure greater coherence of policies likely to have an impact on migration
but also to ensure full consistency with respect for human rights and development objectives.
To this end, it is essential to systematically conduct impact studies of policies (economic and commercial, investment, cooperation, environmental, migration, etc.) on countries and populations in the South, and therefore on migration (both South-South and South-North).
Promoting the mobility of migrants and improving residence procedures
Facilitating access for non-European foreign students
Access for non-European foreign students to study in our country has long been an important form of development aid.
Ecolo, however, is arguing that the costs of welcoming foreign students should not be included in the amounts of development aid.
This policy must also be seen as an opportunity for openness and cultural exchange for Belgian students who attend the same lecture halls.
It is important to improve the systems for equivalence of foreign students' diplomas, particularly with a view to providing better information and greater efficiency to the administrative service responsible for these equivalences.
Ecolo wishes to consider strategies that could encourage foreign students to use their knowledge and experience to benefit the development of their country of origin,
while providing a legal status allowing foreigners who have studied in Belgium to return regularly in order to maintain a strong link between the country of study and the country of origin and to enable a real exchange of knowledge, information and experiences115.
Rebuilding a visa policy on the freedom of movement of human beings
The issuance of a visa should be conditional solely on verification that the applicant poses no danger to public order or national security.
Such flexibility in visa issuance may help to put an end to a paradoxical effect of an overly rigid policy.
: incitement to go underground, dissuasion from returning to the country of origin, strengthening of channels (human trafficking).
One only needs to know the difficulties116 of obtaining a visa to enter a European country to understand that many of those who have obtained one remain there after the expiry of the visa for fear of no longer being able to return117.
Allowing immediate access to the labour market for citizens of the new Member States of the European Union
Ecolo considers it discriminatory to maintain restrictions on access to the employment market of the 15 old member states for nationals of the new member states.
It is therefore essential to enable them to access decent work, particularly in order to avoid clandestine networks, the exploitation of workers and undeclared work.
Granting the right to work to holders of a right of residence
As illogical as it may seem, the right to decent work, although it exists in theory, is not systematically guaranteed to a foreigner with a right of residence other than tourism.
However, access to the job market for foreigners is of central importance for integration.
Ecolo proposes to include in the law the provisions necessary for the implementation of this unique procedure, ensuring that beneficiaries are legally guaranteed equal treatment with national workers and that they are provided with support.
Promoting the integration of migrants
Integration policies must be based on the principles of equality and enable migrants to participate fully in the social, economic and cultural life of society... while respecting diversity.
Intensive support for new arrivals and people currently in precarious situations or excluded from the job market must be an absolute priority so that immigration becomes a positive reality, both for host countries and countries of origin.
115 Experience shows that a large number of foreign students no longer return to their country of origin once their studies have ended because of the loss of their right to reside in Belgium, which is so difficult to recover. 116 Applicants for short-stay visas are faced with queues, incomprehensible refusals, complete arbitrariness and the absence of any effective means of appeal. 117 Mehdi Lahlou, professor of economics at the National Institute of Statistics and Applied Economics (INSEA) at the University of Rabat, and a specialist in issues related to migration and development, explains that "the generalization of visas in host countries has added to the attraction that Europe exerts the feeling that it has become "forbidden", (...) has greatly contributed to the increase in movements carried out clandestinely, and has been able to transform human movements that occurred in both directions, into permanent settlement in certain European countries for fear of no longer being able to return" (Mehdi Lahlou, Irregular Migrations between the Maghreb and the European Union: Recent Developments, Cooperation Project on Issues Related to the Social Integration of Immigrants, Migration and the Movement of People, funded by the European Commission).
To include in a law clear and permanent criteria for
regularization and create an independent regularization commission
It took the outgoing government more than a year, starting with the government declaration of 18 March 2008, to identify regularisation criteria in a government "instruction" of July 2009, which was ultimately annulled in early December 2009 by the Council of State on the grounds that the determination of these regularisation criteria falls within the competence of the legislature and not of the executive branch.
However, applicants for regularization remain hopeful that the Immigration Office will keep its promise to loyally follow the criteria of the investigation.
However, uncertainty remains: will the Minister who will take over the portfolio of asylum and migration policy maintain the course?
For Ecolo, these regularization criteria must be included in a law but also become permanent.
Indeed, the reasons which justify regularisations (in addition to the administrative delays in the asylum procedure) are recurrent and it is therefore healthier to put in place a policy of progressive regularisation based on clear criteria, than massive “one-shot” measures.
Ecolo has submitted a proposal which advocates 5 permanent criteria, enshrined in law: being under an asylum procedure lasting more than 3 years (including the procedure at the Council of State);
be unable to return to the country of origin;
be seriously ill or disabled;
have lasting social ties in the country or have humanitarian circumstances to prove;
have a socio-economic contribution project in Belgium.
Ecolo also proposes to organize a procedure before an independent commission composed of three members (a magistrate, a lawyer and a representative of a recognized NGO carrying out its activities in the field of human rights).
Create an administrative jurisdiction for full appeal
As part of the reform of the law of December 15, 1980 and the Council of State, a new administrative jurisdiction was created: the Council for Foreigners' Litigation (CCE).
However, this jurisdiction completely misses the expectations that could be had of it.
Ecolo considers it necessary to create an administrative appeal court competent to deal with appeals against decisions taken in application of the law of 15 December 1980 with a suspensive appeal, an oral procedure and a power of reform in all cases.
Improving existing immigration channels
Ecolo proposes to abolish measures which hinder the possibilities of family reunification.
Everyone, regardless of nationality, has the right to lead their private and family life to the fullest.
Protecting the rights of migrants, the interests of countries of origin, as well as those of the host society
Existing migration models118 are generally utilitarian, almost exclusively for the benefit of the country that opens its doors:
"Brains" or immigrants with a particular professional qualification are welcome in the host country.
118 In the United States, the most common work visa is issued to people with a college degree or comparable qualifications. There are also special visas for workers under
The European Greens are continuing their active work of amending the Commission's proposals in the area of ​​migration, asylum and border control policies with the political objective of harmonising European legislation at the highest level on the basis of the most protective standards.
Different interests involved must be accommodated:
the interest of the State from which the migrants come, particularly in the least developed countries:
conventions between the European Union and the countries of origin as well as European regulations could set standards to determine conditions, criteria, limitations and establish a possible system of fair compensation to the country of origin (or transfer of acquired rights);
a limitation of “brain drain” is legitimate and even desirable;
the interest of migrants who, on the one hand, may wish for a better life but who, on the other hand, are often exploited because the call for foreign labour also concerns migrants with few or no qualifications for jobs where the apparent shortage of labour sometimes masks poor working conditions;
the economic, social and cultural interest of the society to which the migrants are destined;
Before crying out too quickly about a shortage of workers, it is necessary to provide for an obligation for trade union consultation to check whether sufficient efforts have been made to ensure decent work, improve working and salary conditions and to combat discrimination in hiring.
Ecolo also advocates for the ratification of the United Nations International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families119,
and Conventions of the International Labour Organization (ILO), including C143 on migration in abusive conditions and the promotion of equality of opportunity and treatment of migrant workers.
Opening a new European immigration channel for social, economic, humanitarian or environmental reasons
A Europe that recognises its share of responsibility for global economic, social and environmental imbalances, and which combats the root causes of these imbalances (inequalities, environmental degradation, etc.) would more easily enable migratory movements to balance themselves out.
But in parallel with the development of such an ambition, other migration possibilities must be considered in the shorter term.
Ecolo therefore recommends the establishment of a possibility of immigration for social, economic, humanitarian or environmental reasons.
This legal framework would allow immigration based on criteria linked to the individual's situation in their country of origin.
To this end, it will be necessary to develop a range of economic, social and humanitarian criteria (taking into account structural and individual elements, the vulnerability situation of the immigration applicant and the situation of the country of origin).
European regulation of this immigration would allow the migrants concerned to be distributed between the Member States according to the reception capacity of each of them.
Recognizing a specific status for climate refugees120
The impacts of climate change on human societies are already being felt in many parts of the world, mainly in the poorest regions, and are giving rise to significant population movements that are likely to only increase in the decades to come.
For Ecolo, the recognition of climate refugees, in the same way as refugees within the meaning of the Geneva Convention, is essential, not only for emergency aid in the event of natural disasters, but also for the reception of these people by a third country in the North or the South.
At the same time, adaptation and climate change mitigation policies must be put in place and strengthened in order not only to avoid the conflicts that may result, but also to provide the populations concerned with adequate means of adaptation.
Fighting for the safeguarding and correct application of the right to asylum
It is morally and legally essential to welcome asylum seekers with solidarity and in compliance with international conventions and the principles of our rule of law.
However, this fundamental right has been experiencing difficulties since 2008, as the policy for welcoming asylum seekers has been going through a serious crisis.
The right to protection (refugee status or subsidiary protection) is also the subject of opposition, increasing the barriers to its exercise:
detention of asylum seekers, applications rejected too quickly on the grounds that they are “unfounded”, return to countries considered responsible for processing asylum applications according to the criteria of the Dublin II regulation but which do not respect the right to asylum (Greece for example) …
Ecolo is fighting against the tightening of asylum seekers' rights in legal texts and for the correct application of existing texts.
Reform the system for welcoming asylum seekers to accommodate them with human dignity121
Since August 2008, the networks for welcoming asylum seekers have been completely saturated.
Some of the beneficiaries then remain on the streets, whether they are families with minor children residing illegally whose admission is automatically refused, or asylum seekers.
This problem was foreseeable since the modification in 2007 of the asylum procedure and the elimination of the two phases in the procedure (admissibility and merits).
Before the reform, asylum seekers declared admissible could leave the reception centre and look for accommodation since they received financial assistance from the CPAS during the examination of the substance of their asylum application.
The reform results in a longer stay for asylum seekers in reception centres.
120 The term "environmental refugees" is commonly used to refer to populations forced to leave the place of residence on which their survival depends, due to the destruction of this living environment or its degradation. We speak of "climate refugees" when these people have been forced to leave their country due to a disaster directly linked to changes in our climate or the deterioration of our environment. 121 Motion for a resolution on the crisis in the reception of asylum seekers, tabled by Zoé Genot and Tinne Van der Straeten (DOC 52 2294/001).
Faced with this dramatic situation, Ecolo is proposing emergency and structural solutions:
in the short term, empty public buildings should be requisitioned in order to provide emergency housing;
Structurally, we must return to the principle of the text on the reception of asylum seekers;
when the processing of the asylum application takes more than six months (which should only be the case for complicated cases), financial assistance must be provided by the federal state, via the designation of the competent CPAS within the framework of the distribution plan for asylum seekers;
this aid could be equivalent to the social integration income and the costs for the State would in any event be lower since there would no longer be any accommodation costs in reception centres or hotels;
these asylum seekers will benefit from support in their search for accommodation;
in this configuration, the CPAS must receive an allocation of additional personnel and operating costs to enable them to provide proper social support.
It is also necessary to provide that, as soon as the reception network reaches 90% of its capacity, the autonomy procedure (including assistance in finding accommodation) is implemented for the oldest residents.
This is to avoid further saturation of the reception system.
Finally, an increase in the number of Local Reception Initiatives (ILA) in each municipality would make it possible to house a significant number of families.
Deeply reform the Dublin II system
The Dublin II Regulation imposes criteria for determining the State responsible for examining the asylum application without taking into account the problematic consequences that this may entail.
This system leads to the separation of families (only the links between spouses or parents and children are taken into account), random and even problematic results for obtaining protection...
In particular, the decisions to refuse to process asylum applications by Belgium on the grounds that Greece has jurisdiction once the asylum seeker has passed through Greece are being singled out.
These decisions, which are very common with regard to Afghans, are scandalous given that Greece does not provide any protection to these people and expels them to their country of origin.
Ecolo wants a thorough revision of the Dublin II regulation to allow asylum seekers freedom of choice of host country
and the establishment of financial solidarity between European states based on the number of asylum seekers received.
Grant admission to stay and a suspensive appeal to all asylum seekers
Currently, not all asylum seekers benefit from this right.
Those who are the subject of a decision refusing to consider a new asylum application (Annex 13 quater), those who receive a decision on the grounds that Belgium is not responsible for their asylum application (Annex 26 quater) and asylum seekers who are nationals of the European Union (Roma from Romania, for example) benefit from a right of appeal which does not suspend the order to leave the territory which has been given to them.
Ecolo intends to put an end to this discriminatory treatment and grant the same rights to all asylum seekers.
Ensure the correct application of existing procedures for granting refugee status and subsidiary protection
In force in Belgium since October 2006, the procedure for granting subsidiary protection has been the subject of much criticism:
the application of the provisions is very restrictive, even in violation of legal provisions.
In particular, the situation of Afghan asylum seekers is very worrying given the disastrous situation in which their country finds itself and the low rate of granting of protection.
The operation of the General Commission for Refugees and Stateless Persons (CGRA), which is responsible for examining the merits of an asylum application or the granting of subsidiary protection, presents several problematic elements.
The CGRA is organically independent, which poses a problem when bad practices are observed.
In fact, the only control of the CGRA's decisions is by way of appeal to the Council for Foreigners' Litigation (CCE), which is largely insufficient.
Parliament, for its part, is only informed of the activities of the CGRA through the transmission of the Commissioner's annual report.
Ecolo therefore proposes to include in the law a control of the CGRA by the House of Representatives.
In order to improve the rights of asylum seekers, Ecolo also proposes to provide access to the Documentation and Research Centre (CEDOCA), which is a support service for processing CGRA files, and that the assistance of the Asylum Documentation Centre should also be accessible to asylum seekers and the people who assist them in their procedure.
Working towards the financial and legal overhaul of the UNHCR
This strengthening must make it possible to effectively protect asylum seekers and refugees, rather than the interests of the governments that finance it.
Improving the protection of vulnerable categories
Ecolo wants the provisions of the Geneva Convention relating to the status of refugees to be fully taken into account, particularly with regard to persecution linked to sexual orientation, forced marriages, mistreatment, and to extend them to environmental degradation, a growing source of migration.
Ecolo also wants special protection for the most vulnerable categories of migrants, whether they are:
women, in particular through the creation, within the Foreigners Office, of a “gender office” made up of agents specializing in gender-related issues;
Unaccompanied Foreign Minors (UFM), by adopting specific measures meeting the needs of UFM, in order to improve reception in terms of accommodation, schooling, support, etc.
sick persons, in particular by amending the royal decree of 12 December 1996 by replacing the limitation of emergency care with the notion of care necessary to protect the person's state of health;
victims of human trafficking,
through a strengthening of existing measures and the granting of an unlimited right of residence to victims of human trafficking who have cooperated with the authorities.
