The "Siderov" plan. A new path for Bulgaria. Summary of the Attack Party Program
<The Siderov Plan. A new path for Bulgaria>
Summary of the Attack Party Program
A new path for Bulgaria
Globalism has failed.
Monetarism has failed.
The liberal policy "less state, the market decides everything!" failed.
The global financial crisis caused by the US showed it clearly.
Market fundamentalism, turned into a religion by the financial and political domination of the USA, has suffered a total collapse.
Europe is in economic shock.
The leaders of the major European countries are making helpless and chaotic movements and giving mixed signals.
Leading world figures in economics and political science have recognized the collapse of the previous global model.
They talk about returning national identity to the economy.
Francis Fukuyama, an apologist for capitalist fundamentalism who wrote The End of History, declared a need to "strengthen nation-states."
Milton Friedman, the guru of monetarists and neoliberalism, desperately admitted his own failure as a theorist and said that the pressure on Eastern European countries to privatize totally and quickly was a mistake.
Even in the UN development program, the revelation crept in that neoliberal doctrine and rapid and total privatization in the countries of the former socialist camp had led to mass poverty for over 100 million Eastern Europeans.
Carl Schwab, the founder of the world economic forum in Davos, emblematic of hypercapitalism, said a month ago: "Capitalism in its current form has no place in our world...
There is an urgent need for new thinking, not more business...”
New thinking!
Not new forms of global financial speculation,
not new supranational corporations destroying national economies,
no more wall street
but more reason, balance and justice.
Those who pumped turbo-capitalism for decades came to this conclusion.
Ordinary citizens of the world, who were impoverished by this pumping and are now making mass protests against the global financial dictatorship, also came to this conclusion.
Only in Bulgaria the corrupt and nationally irresponsible ruling elite is still outside of time and space.
Neither GERB nor any other party in the parliament, except ATAKA, raised the issue of a new economic philosophy of governance in Bulgaria.
Ataka wants a radical change of the economic model - from neoliberal market fundamentalism, to strong state regulation and social justice.
The European Union has failed economically.
This truth must also be spoken clearly out loud.
Eurozone countries are trying to solve the problem by pouring more billions into the pockets of those who caused the debt crisis - the banks and investment funds.
ATTACK poses the question: Should Bulgaria continue to be a member of the EU, as it is today?
The European Union in its current form is a threat to democracy and the national sovereignty of the member states.
It became a new Soviet Union, working by force and unconstitutionally.
The fictitious figure "President of the EU" was also imposed, which contradicts national and international law.
This "president of the other presidents" installed at the top of the euro pyramid recently said that national parliaments are getting in the way of Brussels.
This is the end of the illusion of a common market and democracy in the EU.
If the rules in the EU are not changed, Bulgaria is threatened with depersonalization and disappearance.
Unfortunately, today's Bulgarian representatives in the European structures do nothing to publicize this danger.
True nationalists should be sent there to fight for the restructuring of the European Union, and not to become pawns of global politics.
The European Pact, in which the GERB government included us uncritically and without a referendum, is a hollow and false construction.
It does not solve the problems of growing poverty, unemployment and social stratification in Europe.
The Europact only strengthens the power of the supranational banking and corporate oligarchy.
Before the Eurobureaucrats in Brussels, every move of our government must be presented for approval - from the budget to the energy policy.
The European Pact that Borissov signed makes the existence of a parliament and government, the holding of elections and democracy in general meaningless.
According to this pact, Bulgaria loses its sovereignty
To this we must add its previous status as a colonized country.
Today's neoliberal government has reinforced the policy of concessions and foreign monopolies that rob Bulgarians.
Our gold has been given to a foreign company for tens of years, which exports it without control and earns billions from it.
Bulgaria has gold deposits worth over 100 billion euros!
In terms of gold deposits, we are in fourth place in Europe.
Today, however, the profit from gold mining flows outward.
Despite the urgent calls of the ATTACK party to cancel the concession contracts, the rulers of GERB continue to give away billions to a foreign dubious company.
The profits from electricity, from supermarkets and malls, from our mineral waters and mobile operators are flowing out.
In 2010 alone, impoverished Bulgarian citizens left over 10 billion BGN in foreign supermarket chains.
This money is exported and does not work for the Bulgarian economy.
Ataka wants the return of all these resources to Bulgarian hands.
We calculated that such a return would raise the standard of the Bulgarians several times.
The Bulgarian is subject to economic and price discrimination.
The prices of many essential goods in our country: milk, cheese, flour, sugar are more expensive than in Germany.
Medicine prices are also more expensive in our country.
In our country, however, the minimum wage is 290 leva /148 euro/ month, and in Germany - 3116 leva /1558 euro/ month.
In our country, the minimum pension is 145 BGN /74 EUR/, in Germany - 1800 BGN /900 EUR/.
The difference between the Bulgarian labor price and the rest in the EU is on average 8.7 times lower than that in the European Union.
What kind of EU members are we then?
Are we Bulgarians nine times inferior to other Europeans?
The economic model of our country is wrong.
It only works for supranational corporations.
For their pawns in the face of the ruling party and the political elites who have ruled until now.
As well as for the main part of the media and the sociologists who serve them.
Therefore today - 22 years after the turn from a state, centrally planned economy to market and monetary fundamentalism, the result is deplorable for our nation.
Ataka wants a radical change of the economic model.
From a country of stratification, of mass poverty and corruption and a 2% oligarchy, we must become a country of social stability, the middle class and predominantly Bulgarian large and medium-sized businesses.
How can this be?
With the energy of those who have proven that they work for the Bulgarian cause.
With spirit.
With faith.
With an action plan.
What the Siredov plan states:
1. Sharp and immediate jump up in income:
Minimum salary in Bulgaria - BGN 1000
Minimum pension - BGN 500
Now!
Not in 25 years!
2. Immediate cancellation of gold mining concessions and return of the profit of 3 billion euros per year to Bulgarian hands for the benefit of the entire nation.
3. Immediate cancellation of the contracts with CEZ, EON and EVN and the return of the profit of 1 billion euros per year in Bulgarian hands for the benefit of the entire nation.
4. New regulation and composition of customs, return of 2 billion euros annually from smuggling into Bulgarian hands for the benefit of the entire nation.
5. Construction of two new units at the Kozloduy NPP, plus a new NPP
6. State bank only for fast and cheap lending to small and medium businesses
7. Creation of a cooperative bank with initial funding from the state, especially for agriculture
8. Elimination of unemployment for 6 months with a special state employment program, through state projects and orders
9. Creation with state funding of a high-tech park and a state center for the realization of Bulgarian inventions and patents, which will bring billions in profits.
10. General redirection of the Bulgarian economy towards China, India, Brazil, Japan and Russia, which gives strategic support to the whole plan.
These changes are possible!
Bulgaria needs them vitally.
We can make them!
We know how.
Only one thing is needed: the power must be in the right hands!
