top priorities
1. Coping with the economic crisis
The ODS government, in cooperation with leading experts, started the fight against the economic crisis by adopting a number of anti-crisis measures.
We want to continue this cooperation.
Coping with the crisis is one of the main tasks of the following period, with the main aim of supporting employment
and tame the dangerous indebtedness of the state.
2. Simple and low taxes
We promote low taxes, so we want to keep them at the current level.
A lower tax burden reduces the incentive for tax evasion.
People will have more money for their own use and companies for development.
The priority is to simplify the tax system.
3. Healthy public finances
The future cannot be consumed irresponsibly.
A prudent budgetary policy, leading to balanced budgets, is the way to avoid the fundamental economic problems that some European countries are getting into today.
4. Address social system
We promote an addressable and fair social system that helps those who really need it.
That is why we emphasize helping socially disadvantaged groups, such as the disabled, elderly fellow citizens or parents with small children.
5. Increasing employment
The key to increasing employment is motivating employers to create and maintain jobs.
A more flexible labor market is essential
and a motivating social system favoring active behavior and penalizing passivity when looking for a new place.
6. Stop abuse of social benefits
The social system must not be abused, because then our solidarity is also abused.
Those who receive social benefits must be aware that in addition to rights they also have responsibilities.
7. Support for families with children
We transferred support for families with children to the tax area.
We compensate for the more targeted payment of social benefits by reducing taxes.
We want to expand the freedom of choice in balancing childcare and work and to promote new pro-family services that almost do not exist in our country.
8. Pension reform
The completion of the pension reform is essential for the financial sustainability of the pension system in the future.
The reason is demographic development and the increase in the share of older people in the total population.
The sooner the reform is implemented, the better for current and especially future generations of seniors who are otherwise at risk of falling into poverty.
9. Care for the elderly
Our approach to the elderly does not consist only in pensions increased by statutory valorization.
The positive phenomenon of increasing the average life expectancy in our country calls for a more intensive development of services for the elderly.
We prefer care in a home environment and natural community.
10. Availability of the highest quality medical care
We promote the best possible medical care for everyone.
Moderate and socially sensitive participation of patients in the financing of health care contributes to increasing the availability of state-of-the-art treatment for serious diseases and reducing waiting times for demanding medical procedures.
11. Business support
We believe that only free markets, based on businesses, entrepreneurs and their activities,
they are a fundamental prerequisite for healthy and rapid economic growth.
We will continue to remove barriers that complicate business.
12. Educated society
The development of education and schooling is a priority.
With increasing education, the possibility of application increases.
The purpose of our policy is to create an environment in which citizens can find their own educational path - at any age.
13. Reducing bureaucracy
We promote a leaner and more efficient state.
We want to continue cutting red tape.
We will complete the modernization of the state administration so that it is closer to the people and friendly to them.
14. Fight against corruption
Corruption represents a social evil of the first order.
We will limit the space for corruption and
we will abolish redundant regulations that create space for protectionism, clientelism and corrupt practices.
We will make public contracts more transparent,
we will increase penalties for corruption.
15. Safe state
People must feel safe in their country.
The state must not unnecessarily limit a person's freedom, but
must establish simple, clear and comprehensible rules of human behavior,
ensure consistent protection of these rules and punish their violations.
ODS in government
The reform of public finances slowed down borrowing.
The biggest problem that the ODS government inherited from the ČSSD was the unsustainable growth of indebtedness.
Socialist governments have unnecessarily burdened public finances with deficits of 100 billion at a time of economic growth.
The increase in social spending promoted by the Paroubka government before the elections in 2006 would mean, without any interventions, an increase of CZK 70 billion, which would be the highest year-on-year increase in history.
By 2010, social costs would rise by a total of CZK 146 billion without reforms.
The public finance reform promoted by the ODS government stopped this trend of spending growth.
The state budget deficit in 2008 reached CZK 19.4 billion and was the lowest since 1997.
By 2010, we reduced social spending by a total of CZK 90 billion.
Reduction of the tax burden.
The tax quota fell from 36.5% of GDP to 35.2% of GDP in 2006-2010.
With the income tax reform, we reduced the tax burden by a total of CZK 35 billion.
By reducing social insurance in January 2009, employees will save a total of CZK 18 billion per year.
A flat tax is solidarity.
The flat personal income tax system introduced by the ODS government is in solidarity with low-income groups.
Tax progression is maintained thanks to high tax credits and bonuses.
Employees with one child do not pay tax on income up to CZK 14,700 gross per month, with 2 children up to CZK 19,000, with 3 children up to CZK 23,300 and with 4 children up to CZK 27,800.
An increase in the number of entrepreneurs.
Under the ČSSD government, doing business stopped paying off.
The number of small businesses with up to 50 employees decreased by 26,000 year-on-year at the end of 2005.
The number of self-employed persons decreased by 88 thousand between June 2003 and June 2006.
The ODS government reversed this significant drop in the number of entrepreneurs.
Their number increased by 50 thousand to 957 thousand in the period from June 2006 to June 2009.
Business support.
We have improved the conditions for doing business, more convenient contact with the authorities is ensured.
We abolished the minimum tax and the obligation to use cash registers, increased expenditure flat rates and abolished the obligation to keep a driving record.
A simpler trade law.
We have made it easier for young and budding entrepreneurs to enter the business.
Of the original 124 free trades, only one was created.
The registration form is simplified from 19 to 2 pages and can be filled out online, which is already used by more than half of entrepreneurs today.
Reducing the administrative burden on businesses.
In 2005, the administrative burden on entrepreneurs was estimated at CZK 86.4 billion in costs per year.
We have reduced this burden by approx. 8%, i.e. entrepreneurs will save up to CZK 7 billion every year.
A more accessible social system.
The social system is more addressable.
In 2008, expenditure on state social assistance benefits fell by CZK 14.3 billion compared to the pre-reform situation.
Total savings in this system will reach CZK 60 billion by 2010.
Tax support for families with children.
We have transferred support for families with children to the tax area.
The reduction in taxes and social insurance is greater for workers with children than the overall reduction in welfare benefits.
Families have improved on average despite the abolition of joint taxation.
The increase in household net income was the largest since 1998.
In 2008, net incomes of families with children increased by an average of 9.7%, while in real terms they increased by 3.9%.
The increase in living standards could have been more significant if not for high inflation, caused mainly by the rise in world prices of fuel, food and energy.
Greater freedom of choice when balancing work and childcare.
We have introduced a three-speed parental drawdown (2, 3 or 4 years) with a graduated amount of the parental allowance, enabling greater freedom of choice for families when balancing work and childcare.
A more flexible labor market.
Changes in the benefit system encourage activity and motivation of people and
on the contrary, they disadvantage passivity and punish abuse of the social system.
In 2008, there was a significant drop in unemployment to 5% (June, 298 thousand people).
Without changes in the social system, the subsequent increase in unemployment, caused by the effects of the global economic crisis, would have been more pronounced.
Today, the Czech Republic is the country with the 8th lowest unemployment in the EU during the crisis, while at the end of 2006, during the economic boom, it was around the 15th place.
A decrease in the share of the long-term unemployed.
The ČSSD governments left behind an inflexible labor market with a social system that did not motivate people to stay in the social network as short as possible.
The result was long-term high unemployment.
The number of people without work for a long time - over one year - developed unfavorably, whose share reached almost half.
From August 2002 to August 2006, the average monthly unemployment rate was 515,000 people.
The tightening of the collection of social benefits mainly contributed to the decrease of long-term unemployment over one year between 2006 and 2008 by 46%.
The share of long-term unemployed fell from 44% in 2006 to 29% in 2008.
A more motivating social system.
The financial aid system is more motivating.
In 2008, the number of people on the lowest incomes linked to these benefits fell, and there was an 8.5% drop in benefits paid.
In the same year, the Czech Republic was the country with the lowest poverty rate in the European Union.
Increase in the number of employed disabled people.
In 2008, changes in the system of support for the employment of the disabled led to a year-on-year increase in the number of employers of the disabled by 21% to 1,725 ​​and the number of disabled persons employed in this way by 11% to 27,000.
In the years 2006-2008, the total number of employed disabled people increased by 50%, of which severely disabled people even increased by 2.2 times.
Four valuations of pensions.
The effects of the reforms were compensated for iseniors.
Four pension revaluations from January 2007 to January 2009 made 2009 the highest real value of pensions since 1989.
The average pension paid rose by CZK 1,800 between January 2007 and January 2009, and the average pension amount exceeded CZK 10,000.
Tax breaks have been granted to working pensioners.
Pension reform.
The first stage of the pension reform is the most significant change since the 1990s. years and is the first significant step towards the long-term stabilization of the pension system.
Among other things we extended the gradual increase in the retirement age and the replacement insurance period, changed the disability pension system and enabled a more flexible transition from work to retirement.
A two-fold increase in spending on social services.
Expenditure on social services increased from CZK 13 billion in 2006 to CZK 25 billion in 2008.
We increased the number of terminal social care workers from 29,000 to 37,000.
The lowest rate of incapacity for work since the creation of the Czech Republic.
The changes in sick leave led to the lowest rate of incapacity for work since the founding of the Czech Republic, which was disproportionately high by European standards at that time.
Non-payment of the first days of illness exists in 12 of the 15 developed EU member states, in Finland it even reaches 9 days.
Incapacity for work fell by almost half in 2007-2009, and expenses for sick leave were reduced by CZK 10 billion.
Employers saved a total of CZK 8.5 billion last year thanks to a reduction in health insurance contributions.
Stabilization of the health system.
The ODS government stabilized the Czech healthcare system and freed it from debt after eight years of helplessness by the ČSSD governments.
We created a financial reserve of CZK 28 billion, which protected patients in times of crisis.
We strengthened the role of nurses and increased the evaluation of their work.
More and better care for the seriously ill.
The concentration of specialized and super-specialized care has improved the quality and availability of health care, especially in external medicine, but also in other fields.
CZK 3 billion saved on cheap drugs were spent on paying for the most modern and effective therapies that were previously unavailable to patients.
There has been a significant reduction in waiting times for operations.
More accessible and cheaper medicines for patients.
Although the socialists declared free health care, they covertly increased patient co-payments with drug co-payments.
While, on the one hand, very cheap medicines that were easily accessible to all citizens were covered, on the other hand, many seriously ill patients were threatened by limits on the use of expensive medicines.
Combinations of co-payments for important medicines for seriously or chronically ill patients could amount to an unbearable amount of over 10 thousand CZK per year.
The introduction of a new, transparent drug pricing and reimbursement system meant that 3,000 drugs were cheaper, 550 new drugs were free of co-pays, and a faster process for bringing new, more effective drugs onto the market.
We have minimized price differences for the same drug in different pharmacies.
Protective limit for patients.
We have introduced an annual protection limit for patients of CZK 5,000, or CZK 2,500/year, for surcharges and fees.
It primarily protects elderly fellow citizens and the chronically ill.
Last year, this limit protected 250,000 people.
eGovernment.
The electronicization of public administration means the use of state-of-the-art technologies for more friendly contact between state institutions and citizens.
This saves everyone a lot of time, nerves and money.
We can request a number of statements at Czech POINT contact points (3 million statements have already been requested at almost 6,000 points).
Reform of the Czech Police.
The reform of the police is its most fundamental transformation since the 1960s.
The organizational structure was simplified, redundant administration was reduced, we moved hundreds of police officers from the office to the streets.
As part of the P1000 project, we secured record investments in new equipment (more than 300 modern offices by 2011) and new techniques for police officers.
Schengen.
On December 21, 2007, the last iron curtain fell and the Czech Republic became a full member of the EU.
Border controls were abolished along the entire land border.
On 30 March 2008, border controls were abolished for all Schengen flights.
Changes in criminal law.
We enforced a new form of criminal law, implemented the Criminal Code and created several key amendments to the Criminal Code.
There was a tightening of penalties for the most serious crimes,
and for less serious ones, on the contrary, to the widespread imposition of alternative punishments (for example, house arrest).
Acceleration and streamlining of court proceedings.
The amendment to the Code of Civil Procedure generally speeds up and modernizes civil proceedings.
The main changes include a new form of delivering mail from courts, prioritizing electronic delivery, keeping files in civil courts in electronic form, or relieving judges of the burden by increasing the number of senior court officials.
We launched the key project eJustice, regarding the use of information technology in the environment of justice.
The amendment to the Law on Courts and Judges introduces time-limited mandates for court presidents
, tightens the disciplinary responsibility of the courts and
transfers it to the mixed chambers operating at the Supreme Administrative Court.
We started changing the organization of work at the courts.
In the future, each judge should have their own mini-team to work with.
The result will be a significant acceleration of the court proceedings.
Czech Presidency - Europe without barriers.
The Czech Presidency chose "Europe without barriers" as its motto.
It started its operations successfully and earned the respect and appreciation of other EU member states.
The fall of the government, caused by the purely short-term political interests of the opposition forces, significantly and long-term damaged the image of our country abroad.
A change of government during a presidency, moreover, amid a deepening economic crisis, is completely unprecedented in the European Union.
What we want to prevent
The programs of the ČSSD and KSČM overlap.
The election program of the ČSSD signals that social democracy has moved toward the KSČM programmatically.
The return of social democracy to power would mean a return to irresponsibility, debt and living at the expense of the future.
ČSSD exploits the risks of a global recession for a permanent election campaign, in which it bets on fanning the atmosphere of envy and promising everything to everyone, regardless of reality.
This is evidenced by the pre-election promises of the ČSSD, which will mean:
stopping the necessary reforms,
significant increase in mandatory spending
and state redistribution,
increasing financial claims on employers and entrepreneurs,
increase in taxes and social contributions.
ČSSD program = ticket to Greece.
Today's crisis situation requires a moderate budget policy all the more, because only this means a chance that the crisis will be managed and the Czech Republic will get out of it in the foreseeable future.
The program of social democracy leads to a deepening of the crisis and increasing risks, especially for the less well-off population groups.
ČSSD is preparing "air tickets" for all citizens of the Czech Republic to Greece, which is struggling with serious economic problems.
A similar program would threaten to disrupt public finances in times of boom, let alone times of crisis.
We want to prevent the ČSSD's "certainties" from being fulfilled.
Social democracy brandishes the god-pleasing word "certainty" in every sentence, while fulfilling its policy in reality means:
CERTAINTY of long-term high unemployment,
CERTAINTY of massive indebtedness of future generations,
CERTAINTY of the collapse of the pension system,
CERTAINTY of an increase in the tax burden,
CERTAINTY of business slowdown and distortion of markets,
THE CERTAINTY of a longer wait for demanding operations,
CERTAINTY of bureaucracy growth,
SURETY of the outflow of companies and brains abroad,
CERTAINTY strengthening the influence of the communists,
CERTAINTY overtaking the interests of Russia.
Economics and Business
Taxation and Public Finance
Public debt is enemy number one.
We cannot allow the indebtedness of the state to become a serious problem not only for future but also for today's generations.
It is very irresponsible to say that our country is not facing serious economic problems.
Hungarians, Latvians and now Greeks already know their stuff.
Restructuring of mandatory spending is necessary for ultimate success
, implementation of pension and health reform,
increasing the efficiency of state administration,
fighting corruption,
more efficient tax collection and clear and controllable economic rules.
The implementation of consistent reforms, conditional on the recovery of public finances, will make it possible to significantly better overcome the potential risks of global crises.
Taxes
ODS is convinced of the correctness of low taxes.
This will leave more money for people to use at their own discretion, for investments that they themselves believe are correct.
Low taxes allow businesses to build equity and grow.
Low taxes are a permanent economic incentive for foreign companies to locate their production capacities here.
Simple and low taxes.
We will significantly simplify and clarify the tax laws.
This will lead to transparency in tax collection and reduce the rate of tax fraud.
At the same time, we will keep taxes at the current level.
We will not increase social security contributions either.
We will maintain a flat income tax.
Taxes should serve, not punish, for example, successful doctors, professors, IT specialists and other highly skilled professions with high taxation rates.
The current flat tax system preserves progressivism with high tax credits for children and taxpayers.
A significant increase in taxes for highly qualified workers in the ČSSD submission would cause their outflow abroad.
Single collection and control point.
We will quickly complete the project of a single point of collection for the collection of taxes and levies, which reduces state costs and bureaucracy, saves time and money.
Financial controls will be carried out only by the financial office.
public finance
Our goal is to achieve such a structure of the system of public budgets that, in the long term, will allow us to achieve a balanced economic result.
We want to take care of the development of the total public debt, which will not affect the stability of public finances in the future.
The Czech Republic could theoretically become a member of the eurozone in 2015.
However, the ODS will continue to take the approach according to which the Czech Republic should adopt the euro only at the moment when the benefits of joining the eurozone outweigh its disadvantages.
Financial Constitution.
Taxes and public money are decided by politicians, and therefore they should also be directly responsible for their management.
Therefore, we will enforce the constitutional law on budget discipline and responsibility - the financial constitution.
It will mandate governments and parliaments to behave in accordance with budgetary discipline and responsibility.
It will also set the bars and brakes on wasteful budget policy.
We will introduce sanctions for non-compliance with this budgetary discipline for members of the government and MPs.
Balanced budgets within 7 years.
In 2012, the draft state budget will be presented so that its deficit reaches a maximum of 3%.
We will propose a law on balancing the state budget by 2017.
We will prevent sanctions and the loss of credibility of the Czech Republic.
Government spending must be commensurate with the state of the economy even after the crisis has subsided.
We promote compliance with obligations towards the European Union so that the Czech Republic is not threatened with sanctions or loss of credibility.
Austerity budget for 2011.
Ministers will have to cut their operating spending by 5% and capital spending by 4% in 2011.
We will conduct personnel audits at state and local government offices.
National Budget Council.
We will create a National Budget Council to review budget spending frameworks and proposals affecting the budget.
The Council will be created by the transformation of the Department of the Ministry of Finance, and its members will be appointed by the President.
No legislative proposal can be discussed without the council's opinion on the budgetary implications and the impact on the business environment.
Central purchases and online auctions.
Government purchases exceeding a certain limit will be made centrally.
This will save on administration as well as lower the price obtained due to a stronger negotiating position.
We also want to make standard purchases of material and services for all offices exclusively through online auctions.
Transparent public finances.
We will speed up the establishment of the State Treasury and the implementation of the Public Administration Accounting Reform,
which will contribute to the transparency of financial flows and the efficiency of decision-making processes in the field of public finances.
Expenditures over 1 million crowns will be published on the Internet.
State expenditures will thus be transparent and under public control.
Recovery and acceleration of economic growth.
ODS is convinced that we should earn for the future, not just save for it.
Therefore, we will promote the restoration of confidence, stabilization and flexibility of the economic environment.
We will ensure a stable and flexible economic environment by keeping inflation and interest rates low.
Administration reform.
We will continue to reform the administration (simplifying the operation of registers, modernizing codes and further electronicization) and further reducing bureaucracy.
We will unify regulation.
We will carry out a merger of regulatory institutions in network industries.
The goal of regulation is to increase competition in these industries.
The amendments will not increase the budget deficit.
In the framework of the second reading, it will not be possible to present proposals that will lead to higher expenditures of public budgets than was envisaged in the proposal approved in the first reading.
Agreement on the EU budget.
We will strive for a reasonable agreement on the budget framework of the European Union for the years 2014 to 2020, which will ensure that the EU budget will not increase and that the Czech Republic will remain a net recipient of money from the EU budget in the next period.
We must use European Union funds to the maximum extent possible.
For this upcoming budget period, we will promote a maximum of 3-5 operational programs and their complete subordination to the government of the Czech Republic.
BUSINESS SUPPORT
Self-employed people are not protected by the Labor Code as employees.
They have no paid vacation, no employee benefits, they have to file their own tax returns, they have no certain income.
Freelancers cost our economy and the jobs of hundreds of thousands of people.
So we should respect them and not punish them for their activity.
We reject the dangerous approach of the ČSSD, which, on the contrary, wants to make life more difficult for entrepreneurs with higher taxes through bureaucracy, which can be liquidating for many of them.
Easier to do business.
By reducing the bureaucracy, we will shorten the time to establish a company by a maximum of one week.
Entry in the commercial register will be declaratory, which will limit the power of officials.
Tax holidays.
We will allow a one-year tax holiday for crafts and small services, if the entrepreneur creates at least one new job for at least 2 years and at the same time does not receive social benefits.
The tax holidays can be used over the course of 4 years.
We will prevent tax increases.
We will not allow increases in social security and taxes for businesses and self-employed people.
VAT payments only from paid invoices.
We will introduce the obligation to pay VAT only on paid invoices.
At the same time, we will deal legislatively with the prevention of the possibility of abuse.
We will retain tax rates and depreciation.
We will retain the increased self-employed tax rates and accelerated depreciation beyond 2010.
Loan guarantees.
We will extend loan guarantees to small and medium-sized enterprises through the Czech Moravian Guarantee and Development Bank and the Czech Export Bank.
Invoices due within 30 days.
The state will lead by example.
We will enforce a strict rule that the due date of public sector invoices (i.e. the state, regions and municipalities) does not exceed 30 days.
Disproportionate extension of maturity dates, or even non-observance of them by the state and local governments, is liquidating and immoral towards the business sphere.
We will prevent the artificial price increase of electricity.
By reducing support for renewable sources, we will prevent further sharp increases in electricity prices for final consumers.
Support for renewable sources must be economically viable.
Simple termination of business.
In the event of termination of the business, the entrepreneur will not have to pay income tax on invoices that are more than 4 years past due.
This measure can only be used once.
Down regulation.
We will continue to cut red tape.
30 regulations will be repealed or reduced each year (1/3 based on largest cost/benefit gap, 1/3 public opinion, 1/3 business organization opinion).
Reducing bureaucracy and regulation also at the EU level.
Bureaucracy and administration must serve, not annoy.
We will once again start the process of thoroughly revising the legislation to make it simple, clear and understandable.
We will take care of the active, consistent and qualified assessment of proposed measures and regulations in the European Union (EU bodies), with the understanding that we will not allow any expansive interpretation that will lead to restrictions on Czech business entities.
Continuation of privatization.
We will proceed very cautiously with the privatization of enterprises with state participation, but we will continue with it.
Among other things, part of the shares of ČEZ or Prague Airport should be privatized.
Unlike the ČSSD, the ODS has long held the idea that the state must not replace a private entrepreneur.
Examples from neighboring countries show that even partial privatization is very beneficial to rigid state giants.
All proceeds from privatization will go towards pension reform.
energy
Energy is the lifeblood of the economy and an essential part of modern life.
As the gas crisis in Ukraine has shown, it is also becoming a tool of politics.
ODS is firmly aware of the fact that sufficient energy for all is a basic prerequisite for economic growth and welfare growth.
Responsible governments must ensure sufficient energy for all.
This is not easy in a situation where our country does not abound in energy raw materials.
Nor are we in an advantageous geographical position for their transport - we have no sea.
Therefore, we must be especially careful and not get into a situation of fatal dependence on individual types of resources or countries.
We must be able to efficiently use the small amount of domestic resources available to us.
On the other hand, we must not look for simple, pleasant but short-sighted solutions consisting in suppressing the market mechanisms that have started to work in the energy industry in recent years.
It is necessary to resist the populist solution of re-nationalizing the energy sector.
This would only lead to shortages and high prices in the long run.
Pan-European energy security.
ODS advocates that issues of pan-European energy security remain one of the priorities of the European Union, as it was established by the Czech presidency.
We want to achieve a higher level of cooperation between member countries in crisis situations and continue to create a single EU energy market.
We advocate the inclusion of nuclear energy in the category of emission-free sources.
International cooperation in solving energy crises.
We will be an active part of international cooperation in solving energy crises.
We will strengthen gas security by building the GAZELA gas pipeline from Germany as quickly as possible and increasing the obligation of suppliers to guarantee supplies in times of crisis.
We will connect the energy systems of the Czech Republic and Slovakia more, which - as past crises have shown - will increase security in both countries.
Energy at the national level.
The rise in energy prices, the world economic crisis and the international political situation create a fundamental political question of how to proceed in energy.
Against this background, a long-standing trend - the strengthening of market mechanisms - is suddenly questioned and populistly abused.
The ODS will prevent this reversal, as it is convinced that the "nationalization" of energy is a ticket to a world of scarcity and poor quality at high prices.
We want to preserve a liberal environment in energy, we will prevent the return of strict state regulation.
Energy prices.
ODS rejects ČSSD's proposals for strict regulation of energy prices.
Based on the experience of the past years, it is demonstrable that wherever the state has retained a regulatory role, we buy energy more expensively.
Therefore, the ČSSD's proposal to control and regulate prices in this sector even more is a sign of even higher prices and lower quality services (e.g. lack of fuel, so-called blackouts, etc.).
It's the same policy as carefree borrowing - prices will be lower for a while because it's politically mandated.
But before long, there will be nothing to pay for new resources, renew the energy infrastructure, and prices will rise anyway, but much more drastically.
In addition, the ČSSD proposal goes into the hands of the big ones, just look at the Czech Railways and their carefree life under the supervision of the state.
Supporting a competitive environment.
ODS will strengthen the market environment in energy so that competition really exists and everyone can choose their optimal supplier.
We will support alternative producers and energy providers, thus reducing the dominant position of large companies, whether in the gas, electricity or telecommunications industry.
Energy exchange.
We will support the further deepening and expansion of the activity of the energy exchange, which has proven to reduce the previous enormously fast growth of electricity prices.
The price of electricity rose the most between 2006 and 2007, i.e. at the time when the price was set roughly as the ČSSD is now calling for.
We will ensure that large energy companies (not just state-owned ones) invest a fair share of their profits in renewing and expanding their infrastructure leading to improved supply and greater energy security.
Electric power and heating industry.
ODS conceives the energy policy in such a way that brown coal serves mainly for the needs of the heating industry.
Central heat supply is an important part of the Czech energy industry and ODS will support its further development.
Coal Mining Limits.
Mining beyond the mining limits in Northern Bohemia is only possible on the basis of the settlement of all property relations in the given area and the fulfillment of all other legal conditions for possible mining.
We reject violent interference in the rights of citizens,
whether through state power,
or seemingly democratic referendums.
Nuclear energy.
In the field of nuclear energy, we are promoting the acceleration of work on the preparation of the completion of the Temelín Nuclear Power Plant so that the implementation phase begins at the end of the election period.
At the same time, we want to speed up the assessment of the possibility of expanding the Dukovany nuclear power plant and further mining uranium ore as the only long-term energy source available in the Czech Republic in sufficient quantities.
Renewable resources.
We are obliged to develop renewable resources based on our commitments to the EU.
However, practice shows that artificially encouraged development can lead to crisis situations, whether of a technical or financial nature.
ODS will therefore continue to assess their support very cautiously and uncritically.
Gas industry.
In the gas industry, the priority of the present time is above all safety on an international scale.
In terms of the Czech Republic, this primarily means the strengthening of the gas pipeline system and a higher degree of interconnection with neighboring countries.
The ODS already started these steps during the Czech Presidency of the EU.
In the area of ​​the internal market, we will continue to support supplier competition, which is the best tool to achieve the lowest possible prices for consumers in the long term.
Oil supplies.
In the area of ​​oil supplies, we will respond flexibly to the changing international situation and the energy policies of producing countries.
The basis is to maintain the full operability of both oil pipelines leading to the Czech Republic.
We will leave the relevant infrastructure, which is currently operated by the state companies MERO and ČEPRO, in the hands of the state.
We will consider the possibility of merging these companies into one strong entity.
Transport
Our motto is "Transport that does not burden, but connects and brings closer".
We will promote better service and greater comfort for passengers,
smart solutions for more economical and ecological transport,
good conditions for doing business in transport,
green for responsible drivers and safe roads.
Decency has to pay.
We will support investments in transport infrastructure.
Investments in transport infrastructure are an important support in times of economic crisis and an advantage for the future.
More than 100,000 jobs are related to the construction of transport infrastructure.
We want to use up as much money as possible from the European Union - at least CZK 25 billion every year.
We will speed up the preparations of key line constructions, bypasses of cities and municipalities.
We will pay the same attention to the maintenance of the existing infrastructure.
We will support private investments in transport infrastructure - projects based on public-private partnerships.
We will focus on reducing the costs of building road infrastructure, both in the design part of transport structures, during more transparent tenders.
We will introduce an effective system for penalizing overloaded trucks.
In the future, we will primarily promote the satellite method of electronic tolls.
We will change rail transport.
We will create a competitive environment in railways.
This is one of the basic conditions for improving the quality of railway transport and services for passengers.
We will complete the transformation of Czech Railways into a modern and efficient company that can stand up to private competitors.
We are focusing on renewing the rolling stock and modernizing and renovating the station to increase passenger comfort.
We will solve the financing of rail transport at the state and regional level.
We will provide funds for the completion of express corridors and for the necessary renewal of the vehicle fleet.
We will create the conditions for more efficient and ecological transport.
We will support the creation of modern logistics centers facilitating transport and improving the use of freight rail and also water transport.
This is the way to environmentally friendly transport.
We support the navigation of the middle part of the Elbe as well as the navigation of the Vltava for tourist traffic.
We will relieve people in cities and towns from transit freight transport.
We will introduce a fairer and more efficient combined toll system to better manage traffic flows throughout the day of the week.
At the same time, highways, expressways and bypasses of cities and municipalities will be prioritized for freight transport.
We guarantee good traffic service.
Functional transport service is an important condition for the development of the territory and a higher quality of life for the inhabitants.
We will find a reasonable compromise between the possibilities of public budgets and people's demands for the number of connections.
We will ensure the development of a promising suburban railway, and not only in Prague.
For greater safety on the roads.
We will support a stricter measure against irresponsible drivers and road pirates by changing the Road Traffic Act.
The development of intelligent transport systems will contribute to increasing the safety and smoothness of road traffic.
We propose a system of one license plate for life, a license plate tied to a natural or legal person, not permanently to one vehicle.
We will strengthen state supervision.
We will introduce a transparent system of remuneration for the management of organizations owned directly or indirectly by the state.
We will apply a strict meter to the management of state-owned transport companies.
Economic results and service quality will be regularly and transparently evaluated.
Social system
SOLIDARITY OF THE RESPONSIBLE
Solidarity with the needy and social cohesion are conservative and right-wing values.
Becoming social dimension is not the same as being socialist.
Social feeling is not the prerogative of the left alone, which would like to appropriate this area in front of the public.
However, the approaches differ significantly, as we distinguish between irresponsible populism under the guise of building a "welfare state" and the real solidarity of those responsible.
ODS promotes the idea of ​​a state helping those who really need it.
We don't want to bribe citizens by promising economically unsustainable social security that leads to huge debts,
and, as it shows especially in times of crisis, it can lead to the threat of state bankruptcy in a number of European countries.
This lying to the electorate under the godly slogans of increasing "social security" results in a disproportionate amount of mandatory spending, which is a costly burden on public finances.
Social security must correspond to the economic possibilities of the state, otherwise we expose the future, but also the current generation, to a serious risk of falling into poverty.
More targeted dose distribution.
We promote address distribution of social benefits.
It is better to leave families with low taxes and therefore more money than to take it from them and then pay it out in installments.
Those families where at least one of the parents works are thus favored.
A simpler social system.
We will simplify the social system.
We will link some social benefits and tax credits (such as social security benefits, child benefits and child tax credits).
Support for the socially needy.
We direct social support primarily to the disabled,
seniors,
parents with young children
and students (favorable part-time jobs, new services for families and seniors).
new jobs
Our goal is to maintain and grow employment.
Increasing employment is the only cure for the problems of social systems.
The social system must create an environment where working even for a lower wage is more beneficial than staying on social benefits.
The labor market must be motivating,
favoring activity
and punishing passivity in finding a new job.
Nowadays, employers are afraid to hire new employees even in situations where they have enough sales for products or services.
They prefer to hire agency workers, very often foreigners.
Global experience shows that the more flexible the labor market, the lower unemployment.
Jobs are mainly created by the private sector, so ODS wants to motivate companies to offer and maintain them.
In addition, compared to most EU countries, the Czech Republic has a very low share of part-time jobs, for example for parents with small children.
Motivation for creating new jobs.
An employer who creates a new job for an indefinite period of time for an unemployed person, a graduate or a parent after the end of parental leave will receive a discount of CZK 3,600 on social insurance in one year.
In addition, the state would guarantee the payment of 75% of the possible four-month severance pay for these positions for two years with a one-month notice period.
Support for the unemployed who start a business.
An unemployed person who starts a business as a self-employed person will also be able to receive the full amount of unemployment support for the entire support period.
This measure will be applicable once every 10 years.
More part-time jobs.
The state will provide companies with social insurance relief of CZK 7,200 per year for each part-time worker for parents with children under 12 years of age,
workers older than 55 years,
students,
disabled
or for carers of the disabled.
We will eliminate part-time discrimination by abolishing the minimum health insurance contribution.
More advantageous work by agreement.
We are extending the maximum scope of employment on the basis of a work performance agreement from 150 to 300 hours.
Release of fixed-term contracts.
We will completely liberalize re-contracting and the length of contracts for newly created fixed-term jobs (for a period of 5 years until the crisis is completely over).
We will keep the jobs.
We will enable companies with a lack of orders to increase the qualifications of their employees.
Educational courses will continue to be financed from European funds.
If the company temporarily limits or stops work, it will be able to use reduced working hours, during which the employment relationship with the employee is preserved.
During the time when the employee is not working, the labor office will pay him part of the salary for participation in training and upgrading of qualifications.
It is better to pay workers part of their wages to participate in training programs than to reimburse them for unemployment benefits.
More flexible working hours.
We will introduce more flexible accounts of working hours and allow for a more flexible and uneven distribution of working hours.
Alternative employment models.
We will expand the use of alternative employment models.
These include part-time, homeworking (working at home), teleworking (working from a location other than employment), e-working (working from a location other than employment using the Internet) or job-sharing (sharing a workplace).
We will introduce requalification projects designed specifically for people changing jobs.
With the help of retraining and education, we will help especially women over 50 to find work.
Those who resign themselves will have lower support.
If the employee resigns of his own free will, he will not be entitled to the full amount of unemployment benefits.
Temporary work at another employer.
We will restore the possibility of temporarily assigning an employee to the work of a certified employer.
These measures will create space for the creation of up to 170,000 new jobs in one year.
At the same time, the ODS undertakes that the proposed measures will not increase the state budget deficit.
The necessary costs will clearly be lower than the additional tax revenue from new jobs.
STOP ABUSE OF THE SOCIAL SYSTEM
The social system must not be abused, because then our solidarity is also abused.
We will support those who are actively looking for work.
We will help those who cannot do without the help of the state.
However, those who receive social benefits must be aware that in addition to rights, they also have obligations.
We will tie social benefits even more strongly to a person's activity and strict compliance with the rules.
We will make life difficult for black passengers and slackers parasitizing the welfare system.
Cash benefits for the responsible.
We will extend the non-cash payment of social benefits (vouchers, electronic cards) from the financial hardship benefits to further benefits if it is necessary to protect the interests of children.
We will prevent misuse of benefits, such as gambling or alcohol.
Withholding benefits from non-payers.
If non-payers of rent and administrative fines (for example, for disturbing coexistence between citizens) receive social benefits, the debt will be deducted directly from them.
We will expand and simplify the use of the special beneficiary institute, which allows part of the debtors' benefits to be handed over directly to creditors.
Benefits for ensuring school attendance.
We want to strictly tie the payment of social benefits to ensuring proper attendance of children at school.
It pays to work or study.
We condition the payment of unemployment support after 2 months and material hardship benefits on participation in community service, public service, retraining or educational courses.
Those who refuse them will lose their social benefits.
The higher the activity, the higher the doses.
The amount of material emergency benefits will be graded according to the activity.
It will increase from 20 to 40 hours of work for the municipality in public service per month.
An alternative to the payment of benefits will be the condition of 40 hours of education.
Motivation of the long-term unemployed to activity.
For those who have been receiving material hardship benefits for more than six months, part of the material hardship benefits will be paid in kind.
If they are active, their benefits will be paid in full in cash.
Stop illegal employment.
An employer who consistently and repeatedly illegally employs domestic or foreign workers may be subject to severe fines and may have their business license revoked.
Immigration under control.
We support the integration of foreigners who come to work legally, not just to draw social benefits.
Those who work illegally and disobey the law will be deported.
Electronic junkie.
We will leave the payment of sick leave unchanged, we will introduce an electronic sick leave.
We will reduce the procedure time for awarding pensions and sickness benefits.
Family support
ODS transfers support for families with children to the tax area.
We favor low taxes and increased freedom of choice for parents to balance childcare and work.
We want to leave more money for families at the cost of a more responsive welfare system.
We will offer them new pro-family services, which, unlike many countries in Western Europe, are almost absent here.
Apart from kindergartens, we do not have a wider range of other childcare services.
Favoring part-time work for parents with young children will allow for a better balance between work and family life.
New forms of preschool care.
We will expand the range of child care options with favorable conditions for establishing corporate and other non-state mini-schools, child care businesses and family-based babysitting.
They will become a suitable addition especially to kindergartens, which will continue to dominate the offer of preschool care for children.
Let's give space to the activity of citizens and employers, let's take the system out of the gray zone and set simple and controllable rules for it.
Child care benefits.
We will give tax advantages to employers contributing to the care of their employees' children, as well as to parents using this care outside of public kindergartens and crèches.
Two-speed maternity.
We will now allow parents who want to return to work early to take 18 weeks of maternity leave at 100% of their original salary without receiving parental allowance.
The second option remains maternity leave of 28 weeks with 70% of salary and the option to follow it up with one of the three parental leave options.
Flexible maternity and parental.
For maternity and parental, we will allow you to change their length.
Parental leave will be available until the child is 5 years old.
Courses for babysitters.
We will provide courses for the education of caregivers of children up to 6 years of age from European funds, especially where childcare is difficult to access, for example in smaller municipalities.
This will create new job opportunities even for unemployed women over 50, who often have problems applying to the labor market.
Lower number of children in institutions.
The protection of vulnerable children in our country does not reach the level corresponding to developed European countries.
We want to reduce the number of children in institutions, which is consistently too high in our country.
A child will be taken away from the family only in exceptional cases.
With greater motivation, we will support an increase in the number of foster families, for example by professionalizing them.
SUSTAINABLE PENSION SYSTEM
Pension reform is the most important challenge for the future.
For ODS, responding to demographic developments is perhaps the most important long-term challenge facing our society.
The positive phenomenon of the fastest increasing average life expectancy in our country and throughout Europe is accompanied by a decrease in the share of economically active people.
Czech pensioners are extremely dependent on the state-organized pay-as-you-go system, to a degree that is unprecedented in the developed world.
Due to demographic developments, our pension system most resembles a state-organized pyramid scheme and an airplane gambling game.
We reject the ČSSD populism that no pension reform is needed.
If seniors are to be guaranteed a dignified old age in the future,
we can't lie to ourselves that we can only do with the state's continuous system.
We will have to put more private funds into the pension system, on a purely individual and voluntary basis.
The ODS has the nerve to tell today's 40-somethings and under that if they rely solely on the state's pay-as-you-go system, they will be condemned to a life of poverty in retirement.
We will not lie to the Czech public in this clear and obvious matter.
Anyone who claims otherwise is irresponsibly lying.
We only have the option of reforming pensions.
Or impoverish future pensioners or suffocate the Czech economy with increased taxes and levies.
Our pension system must be developed in the form of a whole range of specific models of supplementary pension insurance, savings or investment.
And we will have to use these tools from a young age.
These changes are long-term in nature, they are made for decades and should not be subject to the fluctuations of the political cycle.
That is why we want to achieve the broadest possible political agreement here.
Support for supplementary insurance and retirement savings.
We are pushing for different forms of superannuation and retirement savings, including greater employer involvement and pension plan competition.
We propose the option of voluntarily transferring part of the pension insurance (4% + 2% surcharge) to pension funds.
This state-organized retirement saving is a chance for higher pensions especially for the younger and middle generations.
Consistent state control.
The ODS rejects the lying demagoguery of the left that mutual fund savings means the privatization of the pension system, as the dominant component of pensions will continue to be the state pay-as-you-go system.
Fund management will be based on a partnership between the public and private sectors and will be operated under strict state supervision.
One fund will be state-owned and therefore guaranteed by the state.
Income from privatization for pension reform.
A prerequisite for starting the pension reform is a sufficient financial reserve for the transition period in a special and already created account.
All privatization revenues will go towards pension reform.
Valorization of pensions.
Because we do not wish to open the income gap between the elderly and the economically active, we support the valorization of pensions given by law.
The pension reform will not affect current seniors.
But it is necessary that the pensions of existing pensioners are not threatened in the near future.
At the same time, the ODS does not support populist bribes to the elderly in the form of the 13th pension, which will only burden the state budget in times of crisis.
We are aware of the difficult situation of some seniors, but it is fair to admit that there was no legal reason for the valorization of pensions this year due to zero inflation.
We will carry out the next valuation in January 2011.
Voluntary transfer of 1% from insurance to increase parents' pension.
We will allow a voluntary contribution of 1% of the pension insurance to the parents (guardians) of the insured to increase their income in their senior years.
This will significantly demonstrate intergenerational solidarity in the family and the link between the number of properly raised children and income in retirement.
SENIOR CARE
The longevity of the population will have a fundamental effect on our social system.
We use the term longevity intentionally instead of the often used term aging.
We are living longer than ever before.
It is the result of better living conditions, better quality and more affordable health care.
Seniors deserve a dignified position in society and a quality life.
The rapid increase in average life expectancy calls for a new perspective on solving the previously neglected situation of the elderly.
ODS will expand missing and insufficient services for seniors.
Support for the care of the elderly in the family.
We will support care for seniors in a home environment.
We will give a tax advantage to family members who care for seniors at home with a higher degree of dependence on their care.
The caregiver will be able to claim a tax deduction in the same amount as when caring for a child.
Development of services for the elderly.
At the level of municipalities with expanded scope, we will create community centers of social and health care and a system of community geriatric nurses and doctors with advanced geriatric education.
We will use money from European funds.
We will support the development of outreach and outpatient social services.
Insurance in case of helplessness.
We will introduce a special insurance that will allow people in the period of economic activity to get additional money to pay for social services in case of helplessness in old age and
thereby increasing the quality of life even in senior age.
Social housing.
We will support the development of social housing including care homes, day care homes, retreat flats and community centres.
healthcare
The goal of ODS in healthcare is to continue the trend of increasing the average life expectancy of our fellow citizens and its quality.
The real and effective way is to actively prevent diseases and to guarantee to those who fall ill the possibility of timely, high-quality and effective treatment, a friendly and professional approach of health professionals and a comfortable environment in medical facilities.
This ambitious goal requires fundamental changes to the health system.
The patient's health and satisfaction is at the forefront of everything we do.
Socially sensitive participation of patients in the financing of health care contributes to increasing the availability of state-of-the-art treatment for serious diseases and reducing waiting times for demanding medical procedures.
At the same time, we guarantee that the quality and availability of health care will not be limited in any way for the socially weak.
We want to be a good steward - we will not allow the health system to put future generations in debt.
Strengthening patient rights.
The patient must have access to all necessary information.
He must know what obligations the medical facility and the health insurance company have towards him.
We guarantee citizens the right to choose a medical facility, health insurance company and insurance product.
We will introduce the ability to make a complaint about the quality and provision of care and insurance.
We will advocate for a fundamental improvement in the access of health professionals to patients and the eradication of corruption from the health sector.
A modern university hospital.
We are transforming teaching hospitals into university hospitals on the European standard non-profit principle and on the basis of cooperation between the state and universities.
We will keep university hospitals public and not privatize them.
We will not privatize health insurance companies.
We will keep health insurance companies as public institutions and will not privatize them.
We will preserve their competition, increase their obligations in providing health care for the insured, and tighten the state's supervision of their operation.
We'll eliminate the fee chaos.
We will put order in the fees and remove the chaos that is the result of anarchy and the conscious violation of the law by the regions under the leadership of the ČSSD.
We will maintain the social protection of citizens introduced by us in the form of a co-payment limit.
Last year alone, he protected 250,000 people.
Superspecialized medical care.
We will continue the successful concentration of specialized care so that every citizen, regardless of where they live, is guaranteed access to state-of-the-art care at the European level.
A strong control role of the state.
We will strengthen the state's control over money in public health insurance, over health insurance companies and the quality of services provided.
We favor those who take care of themselves.
We consider prevention to be key to preventing diseases and catching them in time.
We will support nationwide prevention and screening programs with positive financial incentives for those who participate.
We will enable voluntary additional insurance and savings.
We will create the conditions and space for voluntary supplementary insurance for unpaid or partially paid care or for above-standard care.
We will enable voluntary health savings with state support, especially for the younger generation.
Home and long-term care support.
We will unify the financing of health-social and nursing services for the elderly.
We will enable the creation of voluntary nursing insurance for old age.
By effectively supporting home care, we will give patients a real option to decide where they want to end their long-term illness – in hospital or at home.
We will modernize the public health insurance system.
We will introduce the necessary health care standards that will ensure every citizen is entitled to quality care fully covered by compulsory and solidarity insurance.
We consider the above standard as an alternative to the fully paid variant of care, which the citizen chooses voluntarily.
This principle guarantees the social friendliness of the system.
Equal conditions for health professionals.
We will preserve the inviolability of private property in healthcare.
Equal conditions will apply to all medical facilities, regardless of type and owner.
Health Plan Competition.
We want to enable the selection of products within the framework of public health insurance and
thus enabling health insurance companies to compete for clients.
Thus, citizens will get more services and comfort for the same amount of insurance premium.
Wait time limit for operations.
We will enforce non-extendable waiting times for operations and guarantee the availability of health services, including emergency medical services.
Strengthening primary care.
We will strengthen the competence and responsibility of primary care for effective and efficient patient care and movement through the system.
Medical research.
We will promote health research as one of the research priorities of the Czech Republic financed from public sources.
Electronic healthcare.
The gradual and voluntary introduction of the principles of electronic health (eHealth) means a significant increase in the awareness of citizens and health professionals, the quality and safety of health services, and at the same time it is a successful tool for reducing unnecessary and duplicated expenses.
The ODS is ready to lead a broad political discussion on the proposals in cooperation with experts.
In the interest of citizens, open to a political agreement on fundamental issues of organization and financing of healthcare.
However, delaying the necessary changes is undoubtedly driving us into a crisis.
the safety of citizens
internal affairs
The idea of ​​ODS is that the state should exercise powers that a person cannot handle alone.
By this we mean, for example, the protection of health and property,
not the daily control and intrusions into his privacy.
We therefore need to continue the overall reform of the police.
Security is an issue for all of us, including the private and non-profit sectors.
We require clear barriers for their activities, within which, however, its actors will be as free as possible.
safe and welcoming state
Only as many foreigners as we can integrate in our country.
The Czech Republic cannot be a wide-open gate for everyone.
Only those for whom there is work should have access to us.
We want the integration of foreigners.
Anyone who wants to live here must identify with the local cultural and social rules and must know the Czech language.
On the contrary, we will fight against the uncontrolled influx of foreigners and
creating gated communities and criminal structures.
Everyone knows their policeman.
We will complete police reform.
The police will do less paperwork and more patrolling on the streets.
Thanks to computerization and clear records, police assistance will be faster and more efficient.
We will increase the number of police officers on the streets, everyone will know the name and face of the police officer who protects their safety.
In addition to punishing the perpetrator, the police will also seek compensation for the victims of crimes.
We will complete the creation of an independent inspectorate to investigate criminal activity by police, customs and prison service officers.
Better technology for firefighters, faster assistance to citizens.
We will continue to support volunteer and professional firefighters.
We will ensure further investment in quality technology and equipment.
We will strengthen the prestige of volunteer firefighters in society, facilitate their employment, training and education.
This way the firefighters will be able to protect us better and faster.
Quickly and easily at the offices.
Continuing the development of eGovernment will be our priority.
We will build on the modern methods of communication between citizens and the state introduced by the ODS government (Czech POINT contact points, data boxes, basic public administration registers) and
we will further improve and expand their services.
Our goal is the end of office hours,
the end of bypassing the authorities,
end of paperwork.
It will be possible to arrange everything normally needed electronically from home.
We save time and nerves.
State and official under control.
Thanks to a system of basic registers, everyone will know when the state is intruding on their rights, privacy, personal data.
At least once a year, if the citizen does not request the service more often, each of us will receive an extract from the system of basic registers, where it will be indicated who, when and why changed or used our personal data.
We will finally have the state under control.
Electronicization will also allow the citizen to have an overview of the status of submission and processing of his application at the office at any time.
The state and officials will then work better, faster, more economically, because they will be under the permanent control of each of us.
Electronic elections.
We are striving for the next parliamentary elections to be held electronically.
The voter will not have to go anywhere, he can vote from home via the Internet.
Elections will become more attractive, greater participation will give the elected parties more legitimacy, but also responsibility.
fight against corruption
The ODS considers the fight against corruption to be one of the key tasks for all levels of public administration.
We build it on three pillars: prevention, transparency and punishment.
We will reduce the scope for corruption and remove redundant regulations that create room for protectionism, cronyism and corrupt behaviour.
The long-term success of the fight against corruption must be based on the reduction of bureaucracy, the number of subsidy titles and the volume of subsidies.
Public contracts on the Internet.
Curriculum vitae of the contracts, from tender documentation, decision criteria weights, selection process, commission members to billing will be published.
The members of the selection committees for large value contracts will be chosen by lot.
Greater transparency of companies.
Companies that will apply for public contracts in the future will have to disclose all relevant information about themselves.
Companies without a known and transparent ownership structure will not be able to participate in these competitions.
Public list of companies acting illegally.
Those firms that commit illegal behavior during a public tender will be placed on a publicly verifiable list and will not be able to apply for a public contract in the next 5 years.
Anti-corruption judicial panels.
We will establish specialized judicial anti-corruption panels and
a special unit operating at the public prosecutor's office focusing on corruption of public officials and corruption in public contracts.
Consistent penalties for corruption.
The police and judiciary must have effective tools for detecting corruption (anti-corruption agent, wiretapping and surveillance, cooperating witnesses, imposition of high penalties),
however, they must not be misused to limit the rights of decent citizens.
Those who commit corruption in public contracts, public tenders or auctions will not be able to participate in other public contracts for a period determined by the court.
Harsh punishments.
In serious cases of proven corruption, a convicted person's property may be forfeited.
Whoever is convicted of corruption in connection with public contracts, competitions or auctions will always be punished with a ban on activity in addition to a prison sentence or a fine.
In serious cases, his property may be confiscated.
Increasing the responsibility of officials.
We will strengthen the responsibility of public officials in the management of property, based on the principle of the extended obligation of public officials to compensate for the damage they have caused.
JUSTICE AND LAW
Law enforcement is a pressing and long-standing issue in our society.
Therefore, it is necessary to continue justice reforms.
ODS will continue to promote steps that ultimately lead to streamlining and shortening the length of court proceedings.
A prerequisite for society's continuous development towards freedom is the fair and predictable decision-making of the courts and the strengthening of the rule of law.
judiciary
Continuation of justice reform.
The ODS largely managed to push through the reform of the Czech justice system.
There is a gradual shortening of the length of court proceedings and the elimination of backlogs, especially in the North Bohemian justice system.
We must continue these reform steps in the future.
However, fast and efficient justice is not enough - justice must provide comfortable services to citizens, be humane and friendly to them and, above all, fair.
New rights for citizens.
ODS should finalize some key laws strengthening citizens' rights after the elections.
It is, for example, a new civil code that provides citizens with new rights and protects certain social groups, such as the disabled.
New Criminal Code.
We will continue working on the new criminal code
- this law should better protect victims of crime, for example by making it easier for them to get satisfaction from the offender.
Free Legal Aid Act.
We will finalize the Free Legal Aid Act.
The Czech Republic still lacks a modern comprehensive law that sets clear rules for the provision of free legal aid to all who need it.
Executors and forensic experts.
We will continue to monitor the activities of executors and forensic experts so that they provide quality services to citizens and do not harm their rights.
It will be necessary to adopt a new law on forensic experts.
Continuation of the eJustice project.
We will continue the eJustice electronic management project.
We are promoting other projects leading to more efficient court proceedings and having a clear benefit for citizens, for example the draft of the electronic court file and the continuation of the electronic criminal proceedings project.
Increasing the employment of prisoners.
We will continue to take reform steps in the field of prisons.
Our goal is to continue to increase the employment of prisoners.
We consider their 70% employment to be ideal.
Working prisoners help finance their sentence and gain job skills that reduce the risk of reoffending after release.
Right
Law Enforcement.
Today's state produces hundreds of laws, decrees and regulations that interfere with our lives.
The ODS approach is exactly the opposite.
We prefer fewer prohibitions and orders, but they will be enforced clearly and without exception.
Simple and comprehensible legal order.
We constantly promote the rationalization of the legislative process, the simplicity and comprehensibility of the legal system.
We want to minimize unnecessary regulations.
We reject the idea that making a bad law is better than making none.
Defense
The security environment of the 21st century requires a comprehensive solution to threats.
When dealing with security threats and risks and their elimination, we prefer political means and peaceful solutions.
However, when these instruments are exhausted, we do not hide behind the stronger ones and are ready to contribute our human potential, materially and technically, to the allied military operation.
Foreign-security policy and defense policy must be based on activity, initiative, engagement and fulfillment of allied obligations.
Although the threat of global conflict is currently relatively low,
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and missile technology are among the threats to civilization,
international organized crime,
terrorism,
uncontrolled migration,
religious, ethnic, racial or political extremism.
The Czech Republic is an integral part of the Euro-Atlantic community.
Its defense and security interests are practically the same as those of other NATO and EU member states.
Defense and security threats to which our homeland is and will be exposed can only be faced on the basis of international cooperation.
Strengthening the transatlantic bond.
ODS will strive to ensure that the Czech Republic remains a trustworthy, reliable and above all respected ally in NATO and partner in the EU.
And this despite the fact that Czech reliability towards partners has suffered a lot due to the cowardice and populism of Paroubka's ČSSD.
We will actively support the maintenance of the transatlantic link, not only in NATO, but also in the EU-US relationship.
NATO will remain the foundation of our defense while strengthening our bilateral relationship with the United States.
Foreign operations.
An integral part of the defense of our homeland was and will be the action of our soldiers in foreign operations, especially under the banner of NATO, the European Union or the United Nations.
We consider active participation in foreign operations to be the most effective way to ensure the security of our republic and our allies.
The nature of conflicts has changed fundamentally.
In today's interconnected world, military conflicts are not limited to the place of their origin, but often spread to very distant areas.
Military conflict is thus not only a local or local threat today.
It almost always has the character of a global conflict, and the vast majority of countries in the world are interested in its solution.
Terrorist organizations are capable of causing terror anywhere in the world.
We will therefore push for our defense policy to actively and proactively face this threat wherever such threats are taking shape.
Transformation and modernization of the armed forces.
Despite limited defense spending, it is imperative to continue the transformation and modernization of the armed forces in line with NATO and EU standards.
And so that they are sustainable in the long term and capable of being deployed over long distances, practically anywhere on the planet.
We take it for granted that all the capacities of the armed forces will, if necessary, be able to support the integrated rescue system of the Czech Republic and the Police of the Czech Republic during natural disasters, such as floods or snow disasters.
Missile defense.
Depending on the results of the review of the US foreign security policy, we will seek the ratification of the relevant agreements already adopted in the event of continued US interest in the location of the missile defense radar station.
The continued proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery systems, including ballistic missiles, is clear evidence that missile defense is increasingly becoming a necessity in today's security environment.
Nuclear tests in North Korea or tests of new ballistic missiles in Iran, all combined with the aggressive rhetoric of the representatives of these countries, cannot remain without an adequate response, which is nothing less than ensuring the safety of our citizens.
Company
EDUCATED SOCIETY
Quality education is an important building block of a knowledge-based economy based on industries with high added value, which the Czech Republic should be.
The purpose of the ODS policy is therefore to create such an environment in which citizens can find their own educational path.
All generations can be educated.
We will open a discussion on the scope and form of financial participation of students in higher education.
Education
Compulsory teaching of English from the 3rd grade at the latest.
We will strengthen language teaching in schools.
We will advocate for the provision of compulsory English teaching from the 3rd grade of primary school at the latest.
Emphasis on the quality of studies and schools.
We will ensure the quality of matriculation studies by supporting the common part of the matriculation exam as a criterion for admission to universities.
In apprenticeship education, we will support a uniform final exam in cooperation with employers.
We will introduce a system for evaluating the success of schools.
We will keep the possibility of entrance exams for several secondary schools.
Affordable student loans.
We will introduce affordable student loans, enabling everyone to study and repayable only after graduation.
If the student loan is paid, even partially, by the employer, the repayment will be tax-deductible for them.
Study savings.
We will introduce study savings to reduce students' costs during their studies.
It will be tax deductible up to the Socially Disadvantaged Groups Tax Bonus.
Fund for outstanding students.
We will establish a scholarship fund for excellent Czech students at top foreign universities.
It will help pay for their school fees and some of their living expenses.
Motivation of employers to support education.
The employer's contribution to the education savings of its employees' children will be a tax-deductible expense and the employee's exempt income.
In this way, the employer could advantageously contribute to the savings for the education of the children of its employees.
If an employer chooses to pay tuition fees for a student at a private college, this expense will be tax deductible.
We will support access to employee education so that
the costs spent on employee education, including retraining, were tax deductible.
Accessible education for everyone and at any time during life.
We will support the possibility of providing pre-school and basic education even in small municipalities.
We want to enable everyone to obtain a new qualification at any time during their life.
We will support the expansion of the functions of vocationally oriented secondary schools as centers of lifelong learning.
We will ensure the effective use of European funds for the targeted support of further education of citizens.
science and research
Probably the greatest potential for long-term development and competitiveness of our economy is hidden in science, technological development and innovation.
We now produce products in our economy that are largely designed and sold by someone else.
Science driving prosperity.
Future prosperity will increasingly depend on the results of research, development and innovation.
Therefore, we will focus on research and development funding going to the best institutions and scientists according to the standards of world universities.
Cooperation between companies and universities.
With tax instruments, we will support the motivation of companies and universities for mutually beneficial cooperation in the field of applied research and the introduction of innovations.
Research universities.
We bring research and development closer to students.
We will strive for the majority of basic research to be carried out at top research universities (faculties) in close alignment with the education of students in master's and especially doctoral study programs.
The status of research universities (faculties) will be based on achieved research results as well as on the ability to obtain funds to support research, development and innovation from grant and project sources (including foreign ones).
nonprofit sector
We will simplify tax regulations for the non-profit sector.
Current tax laws put nonprofits in a difficult spot.
They require accounting records and the associated demanding administration, which is more demanding and complex for non-profit organizations than the administration of the business sector.
We are ready, in cooperation with the non-profit sector, to clarify whether this or that income should be taxed or not and whether it is possible to claim this or that expense.
housing
The ČSSD blamed the uncontrollable growth of regulated rents on the adoption of the law on unilateral rent increases and the failure to take measures that would reduce the impact of this law on those tenants who cannot cope with the increase in rent.
By refusing to accept a socially sensitive solution to this problem, the ČSSD creates tension between apartment owners and tenants and will most certainly cause damage to the Czech Republic in the amount of up to 50 billion crowns.
ODS has prepared a solution, including a way to take care of all those who cannot bear the difficult situation.
However, the ČSSD rejected him.
Housing for young families.
We will support the construction of starter apartments for young families, rental and cooperative housing.
The new law on apartment ownership.
We will introduce a new, modern law to help hundreds of thousands of apartment owners, enabling them to take better care of their property.
Social housing.
We will support the construction of social housing, including nursing homes, day care centers and retirement apartments.
Support for the socially needy.
Everyone's responsibility and the working principle of solidarity are most evident in times of crisis.
We must be able to take care of those who cannot objectively take care of their housing.
In order for state aid to be effective, it must be completely targeted.
The state must remember the citizens who objectively cannot afford the rent.
The aid must not be tied to certain houses and dwellings, but to socially needy households.
culture and media
Culture is the freest sphere of civic activities.
The state will support identity, creativity, diversity and the widest participation of citizens in cultural life.
Public support in the field of culture and media will be directed towards specific projects and activities fulfilling a public service.
The state will not take into account the legal form of its provider, but will consistently insist on the absolute transparency of every crown issued from public funds.
culture
Free space for culture and creativity.
We want a free space for diverse cultural activities, including independent culture, so the role of the state must be limited here.
We understand culture in a broad sense, not only as the creation of new artistic values ​​and efforts to preserve the existing ones, but also cognitive, interest and educational activities, as well as social activities, traditions and customs, even the natural and urbanized environment of individual life.
Use of European Union funds.
The total amount of money for projects of typical restoration of monuments, construction of methodological centers and modern cultural centers with higher added value reaches a total of 250 million euros in the 2007-2013 program period.
We must use these resources wisely.
Monument care.
The protection and cultivation of the heritage fund must be one of the cultural priorities.
Money from the state budget will be directed to the restoration of monuments according to clear rules and regardless of the form of ownership.
The owners of monuments must not be punished.
We will equalize the relationship between the owners of monuments and the state while maintaining the standard of protection, which will help the restoration of monuments faster.
Transparent and effective law on monument care.
The state must compensate the owners for the public interest and the resulting limitation of the right to property.
We advocate the adoption of a new monument law with an emphasis on transparency, predictability and efficiency of state monument care with the use of the most modern technologies.
We will continue to rehabilitate the most important national institutions as part of the national cultural treasure care program.
Greater connection of the department of culture with tourism.
The transfer of the tourism agenda after the abolition of the Ministry of Local Development to the department of culture is one of the logical ways to stop culture from being perceived as a mere recipient of state benefits and subsidies.
On the contrary, it will become a mechanism capable of returning money into circulation.
The potential of culture and tourism is so great that it can secure enough money to improve cultural assets and strengthen the prestige of the Czech Republic as an attractive tourist destination.
Culture is not just spending.
More than two-thirds of foreign tourists go to the Czech Republic precisely for the culture of apamátka.
It is necessary to use the economic possibilities of culture right now, in times of economic crisis.
Priority will be given to the use of cultural monuments that ensures their availability and use, for example, for tourism, housing and public cultural services.
By lending collection items to private entities, we want to make the wealth of public collections more accessible to the public.
"The nation for itself".
We want to develop the legal stimulation of cultural support by citizens and companies (patronage) so that the center of gravity of cultural support does not lie on the shoulders of the public administration, but returns to the position it was in before the advent of the communist regime.
In the conditions of the economic crisis, it is doubly necessary.
Strengthening and consolidating national identity is one of the main goals of ODS in the field of culture.
Live art and public support.
We want to support activities fulfilling a clearly defined public service.
Not automatically individuals, groups and institutions who simply put the term "public service" on a signboard.
The general principles of public support, such as absolute transparency of each crown, independence from the legal form of the recipient or the principle of public order, must also apply to the area of ​​culture and media.
the media
Mass media.
Inviolability of freedom of speech and responsibility for spoken word must go hand in hand.
We propose to simplify the system of media councils.
We want to replace the Councils of Czech Television, Czech Radio and the Czech Press Office (in the event that it is not privatized) with a single Public Service Council.
We want to merge the Council of the Czech Telecommunications Authority and the Council for Radio and Television Broadcasting into one "technical council".
On the basis of a transparent grant system, the public service can be supported by any entity, not only the so-called public media.
We will consider the abolition of concessionaire fees for public service reimbursement directly from the state budget.
We advocate the privatization of the Czech Press Office and the abolition of the ČTK Council.
Easier access to the internet.
The Internet is a symbol of freedom.
Therefore, we will be very careful in regulating it, even taking into account the need to prevent the spread of socially unacceptable topics and ideas (pedophilia, xenophobia, extremism).
A prerequisite for the wider use of this phenomenon is easier access to the Internet throughout the territory of our republic.
church and state
Straightening the relationship between churches and the state.
Blocked church property makes development of villages and cities impossible.
We will complete the transformation of the state's relationship with churches and religious societies.
Its basis will be the gradual economic separation of churches from the state and the straightening of property relations.
Our goal will be to find such a future arrangement of the relationship between the state and the churches that preserves the existing freedom of religion for every citizen and
it will not threaten the current status and important function of the churches in our country.
The ODS is ready to conduct fair negotiations at various levels with the aim of achieving the widest possible agreement.
Sport
Sport in all its forms is an important social phenomenon of our time.
It is beneficial for the development of citizens' health, the use of free time and the building of national identity through the achievements of the Czech national team.
In addition, it also has an economic dimension.
State support seems necessary.
The sports environment in the Czech Republic unites over 20,000 sports clubs, over 120 national sports associations and a total of over 2.5 million members.
However, this support must be clearly defined.
These are not only contributions from the state budget for sports, but the conditions for the functioning of sports associations and other organizations must definitely be created.
Financing of Czech sports must have several financial sources:
state budget,
proceeds from lotteries and other similar games,
sponsorship and other commercial activities and
public budgets.
Contribution from the state budget.
We will provide a standard amount of contribution from the state budget to support sports (can be tied to GDP or the total volume of the state budget).
Higher taxation of lotteries and all gambling.
Lotteries, which for the most part operate in the area of ​​sports (betting and odds games), must participate to a greater extent in its financing.
As a quality social activity, sport should receive income from gambling within the framework of prevention of socially pathological phenomena in society.
Support of Czech companies.
Based on the results of the representation and presentation of Czech sport, Czech companies will be interested in supporting sport in any form.
Share of municipalities, cities and regions.
We want to set competences for municipalities, cities and regions so that they participate in the activities of sports organizations and the maintenance and operation of sports facilities.
We will legislatively and technically support the possibility of transferring the device to the ownership of the support provider.
Preparation and development of talented youth.
In cooperation with sports organizations, we will create a continuity of sports training from the age of 6 (general sports activity) to the age of 19 (top and specialized sports activity).
Sports preparation and participation in top world competitions.
In cooperation with sports organizations, we will create conditions for preparation for the Olympic Games, World Championships, etc.
Support will be provided through sports associations and departmental sports centers.
Important sporting events in the Czech Republic.
We will support the organization of important world events on the territory of the Czech Republic, which should take place in the already built sports infrastructure.
And that in sports that have a tradition in our country and whose events are of a shorter duration.
Health insurance.
We will create specialized health care that is primarily focused on talented youth and our representation.
We will enable such a specialized unit to provide commercial services that would ensure self-financing.
Development and renewal of sports infrastructure.
We will develop a core sports infrastructure that ensures the preparation of youth as well as senior athletes.
The rules of such support and the participation of the recipients of the support must be clearly defined.
Development of performance sports.
We will support sports activities of the general public in interest organizations and extracurricular facilities and sports for the disabled.
Political system
The state should be cheap and efficient, its administration simple, predictable and fast.
The state should have competences only in areas in which the citizen cannot handle himself.
We continue to honor the sequence of individual – family – community – state.
We will promote the reduction of the influence of the state in all areas that are completely carried out by the municipality or the individual, and we will prevent the state from entering the areas that are the sovereign competence of the family.
We will prevent the KSČM from returning to power, we will not allow the repeal of the lustration law.
The ODS did not accept the ČSSD government with the KSČM and a few defectors, which Jiří Paroubek intensively strove for after the 2006 elections.
The share of communist apparatchiks in power at the regional level was made possible only by the victory of the ČSSD in the last regional elections.
We reject the efforts of the left to repeal the lustration law.
On the contrary, the Institute for the Study of Totalitarian Regimes was established and materials created by the activities of the former State Security were published.
We support the Open Past project.
We consider it essential that anyone interested can research the materials created by the activities of totalitarian power.
We will prevent efforts to create only a select group who have the right to get to know them.
Effective control of European legislation.
As we do not support further transfer of competences to Brussels
, we need to ensure effective control of the upcoming European legislation and its opposition already at the time of its birth.
That is why we want to create truly representative control of the creation of legislation.
We need separate commenting workplaces at the level of the executive power and both chambers of Parliament, including an effective connection with the offices of our MEPs.
The issue of human rights.
In the ODS concept, human rights will always be a set of freedoms and rights of an individual to organize his life according to his own ideas and to seek his own path to happiness.
We will not allow human rights issues to turn into the demands of individual minorities against the majority society, to confuse human rights with claims against others.
Nowhere and in any direction will we not support so-called positive discrimination, i.e. the artificial favoring of minorities, promoted primarily by the left.
A matter of public interest.
We respect private property.
Any reference to the public interest and its precedence over a private interest must be justified by the protection of other private interests which cannot be effectively defended alone in the matter at hand.
Otherwise, the right to privacy, including the protection of property, always takes precedence.
We intend to pay special attention to the protection of privacy and
fight against the unjustified collection of personal data by public authorities.
Completing the process of dealing with the past.
We insist on the true naming of the crimes of the past, including the conviction of their perpetrators.
We are also aware that the issue of extremism has two faces: class extremism is as dangerous as racist.
We reject a simplistic vision of the world where our threat is rightly nationalist fighters and wrongly not admirers of communist ideas.
The process of coming to terms with the past must be completed by truly including it in the school curriculum of all grades.
Political and constitutional reforms.
After twenty years of democracy, our country needs a number of political and constitutional reforms.
Therefore, we will propose a reform of the electoral system to enable the creation of majority governments and strengthen their accountability.
We want to strengthen the government's position, reduce its ability to be blackmailed by individual MPs, and suppress the existence of so-called "defectors".
The government should be able to push through its program or quickly reach early elections.
We will consider the introduction of the so-called constructive vote of no confidence,
possibly a negative expression of no confidence in the government, which increases the responsibility of the opposition and at the same time strengthens the position of the government.
We will propose a direct election of the President of the Republic.
Leaner and more efficient state.
We will carry out a thorough audit of all activities of the state and other public authorities with an effort to cancel all competences that a free society can secure on its own without unnecessary interventions by the public authorities.
Without the real suppression of unnecessary agendas, the state will never be truly effective.
environment, countryside
Environment
There is no more conservative value than the good state of nature and the environment.
Nature must be understood as a valuable heritage.
The socialist epoch only took from it, as well as from other goods.
It is our duty to fix it.
However, we don't protect the environment or nature for its own sake, we protect it for ourselves and our children.
It is not only a production space for us, but a space for our life.
Therefore, we must start with ourselves and in our immediate surroundings to protect the environment and nature.
Energy savings.
The biggest current environmental problem in the Czech Republic is air quality.
Under the ODS governments in the 1990s, there was a fundamental reduction in air pollution with sulfur, nitrogen oxides and dust.
However, problems with air pollution by small dust particles still persist.
This represents a risk to human health and our priority is to reduce this burden on the population.
That is why we support energy savings and its efficient use in production and consumption, whether it is modern efficient production technologies, energy-efficient insulated buildings, or energy-efficient appliances.
Increasing the energy efficiency of production and the efficient use of energy by consumers reduces the consumption of energy sources, the emission of pollutants and greenhouse gases, while saving our wallets.
Smooth and clean transport.
Smooth driving means fuel savings, faster transport, less emissions and noise, less risk to human health and, last but not least, money savings.
That's why we support the further construction of such transport infrastructure that will take transit traffic out of the centers of cities and towns with the help of bypasses, increase traffic flow and reduce air pollution.
We will advocate for a revision of the biofuels policy at the European level.
We will support the development of emission-free transport.
Ecologically clean energy.
Environmentally clean energy production includes nuclear energy and renewable sources.
They are the way to a healthy environment and reducing our country's energy dependence on foreign sources.
In the only EU country where uranium ore is mined, nuclear energy is a natural part of usable production energy sources.
It does not produce commonly monitored substances that pollute the air or greenhouse gases.
We consider solving the end of the fuel cycle and using spent fuel as fuel for a new generation of nuclear reactors a big challenge for European research and development.
The Czech Republic has an irreplaceable place in it.
Similarly, we also support renewable energy sources.
We support efficient ways of using heat, especially efficient central heat supply systems or, to an economically reasonable extent, solar water heating and the use of heat pumps.
Sources of energy and usable secondary raw materials are also those substances that we consider waste today.
We should reuse what can be reused, burn unusable waste, get energy and save natural resources.
Climate change.
The Czech Republic cannot influence any climate change on a global scale, but it is its duty to behave responsibly and, in particular, to prevent energy waste.
Saving energy is not only an anti-crisis step, but also an important measure that increases our competitiveness against other European economies.
We cannot point to climate change and take measures in the economy that will make it disadvantageous and more expensive, but climate change is a fact to which we must respond.
We believe that the best way is adaptation - preparing to cope with the phenomena that climate change causes - droughts, flash floods, a generally different cycle of water in the landscape, soil erosion and others.
We don't have to fight for climate protection, we just have to do what is factually reasonable and economically viable for our citizens.
Environment and economy.
We support the financing of "green projects" not only within the operational program Environment, but within the framework of all other operational programs that allow it.
Economically, we want to favor the introduction of environmentally friendly technologies, especially technologies with low energy and material requirements.
Completing the removal of old environmental damage - the state's obligation from privatization - must be cost-effective.
For environmental taxes, we will not go beyond the scope set by EU rules.
Industrial ecology.
The ODS government consistently devoted itself to removing old environmental burdens.
The oil sludge in the Ostramo lagoons and the liquidation of the hazardous waste dump in Pozďátky in the Třebíč region are examples of what needs to be remedied in a short period of time.
After many years of hesitation, the ODS government pushed for it.
We will continue to make this environmental improvement.
The public and civic associations.
We appreciate the public interest in environmental and nature conservation issues.
It means that they are active citizens who want to live healthily.
We believe that the widest possible access to information about the environment is necessary to maintain transparent processes when making decisions about changes in the environment where people live.
However, we want to adjust the position of civil associations in administrative proceedings and
to equalize local residents with those civic associations that enter into administrative processes in places they know indirectly.
Responsibility for damage caused by unjustified blocking of buildings or other activities will be borne by the person who claims something that is unfounded.
Development of regions and municipalities.
Territorial planning must be a tool for the harmonious development of municipalities and cities and their integration into the landscape.
We are advocating an increase in the share of regions and municipalities in the management of protected parts of nature and joint decision-making on the determination of societal interests at the relevant level.
We want a sufficient quality of life to be ensured for the citizen in solitude, in a very small village and in the city.
We will complete the construction of waste water treatment plants and sewers in cities and municipalities to the level of the requirements of the 21st century.
We promote the adoption of such measures in the agricultural management of the landscape, which will ensure water retention and permanent protection of underground and surface water.
AGRICULTURE and countryside
ODS perceives the countryside as a space for balanced support of agricultural business, landscape care and environmental protection.
Therefore, we will strive for the maximum convergence of the programs of the Ministries of Agriculture, Local Development and the Environment with the aim of not fragmenting, but
on the contrary, to interconnect the scope of laws and financial support for rural areas.
The practical consequence must be a reduction in the number of decrees and laws and a decrease in the number of employees in the civil service.
This also means a decrease in taxpayer spending.
The basic principles of the agricultural policy of the ODS will always be the defense and protection of property, the support of fair business, the adoption of the responsibility of all entrepreneurs and rural residents to the municipality and the countryside.
We believe that these traditional conservative values ​​have many supporters in our countryside and we promise to defend them to the best of our ability.
countryside development
Settlement of rights of owners and tenants.
Ownership and a responsible relationship with land is a core value for us.
Therefore, it is essential for the ODS to complete the registration of land and
straighten the rights of owners and tenants.
An integral part of this step is a fair property settlement between the state and the churches and the authorized and obligated persons.
We will do everything to complete the process of agricultural and ecclesiastical restitutions.
We consider making agricultural land available to the rightful owners and privatizing the rest of the state-owned land as a necessary condition for rural development.
ODS will continue to support the implementation of land improvements and investments in the country.
Creating new job opportunities.
For ODS, an important condition for rural development is the creation of new job opportunities and
increasing the income of municipalities, including a change in the budgetary determination of taxes.
For the future of the countryside, it is necessary to support the young generation and create the conditions for their stay in the rural area.
In the past period, ODS has historically increased its support for young farmers in the countryside several times.
Our goal is to reach all active rural residents and give them the opportunity to fulfill their interests.
ODS therefore wants to support local traditions and activities of citizens.
We realize that without their activity we cannot preserve and further develop the characteristic environment and atmosphere of our countryside.
Support of regional food specialties.
Supporting the production of typical regional food specialties is very important.
We are ready to defend their application on the market in the EU through trademarks.
The ODS prepared the conditions for higher production of regional specialties by promoting cost reductions for small food producers and expanding the possibility of selling some agricultural raw materials and food from the farm directly to the final customer.
We will continue to pursue these projects.
agriculture and ecology
We support the competitiveness of all forms of business.
In its agricultural policy, ODS intends to support the competitiveness of all forms of business in agriculture and forestry, with special attention to the development of small and medium-sized businesses and the perspective of family farms.
Responsible approach to the environment.
We want to condition the payment of subsidies on compliance with a responsible approach to the environment.
Our goal is to preserve the necessary fragmentation of the landscape, the quality of the soil and sufficient sources of quality water as a prerequisite for the successful management of future generations.
We are ready to take over and defend topics from the field of environmental protection that are of interest to the citizens of the Czech Republic.
By setting the conditions for management, we therefore want to prevent further risks of water and wind erosion, fundamentally limit the consequences of local floods and protect the property of citizens, municipalities and land owners.
For them, erosion reduces the value of their property by billions of dollars every year.
We will seek further investments in anti-flood measures in cooperation with the local authorities and municipalities.
Support for organic farming.
By reasonable support of organic farming, we want to contribute to a wider range of quality food and
at the same time to preserve the diversity of the Czech landscape.
Stabilization of business conditions in the forest.
We consider forestry and the wood processing industry to be an important part of business in the industry.
We want to develop the importance of forests in the environment of our country and stabilize the conditions of business in the forest, in harmony with each other.
Reducing the influence of bureaucracy on business.
In the field of production agriculture, we want to significantly reduce the influence of business officials by canceling or making fundamental changes to existing regulations, laws and decrees.
In order to improve the conditions of our entrepreneurs, we will apply all previously unused support options in the EU environment in order to remove the historically based disadvantage of domestic agricultural production.
Support for homemade food.
By educating the consumer and supporting marketing, we want to present and promote quality food from domestic production.
We will support the growing prestige of our winery and develop the traditions of beer production.
foreign Relations
Fairer subsidies for farmers.
Already during the presidency, the main goal of ODS on the soil of the European Union was to change the calculation of subsidy support for farmers so that it was fair for all member countries.
We remind citizens of the ability of the ODS to negotiate and assert the interests of Czech agriculture and the countryside within the EU, as it clearly demonstrated during the preparation for the presidency of the independent presidency.
The same conditions for new and original EU member states.
Part of the changes to the common agricultural policy that we support is the prohibition of all specific reliefs, exceptions and measures favoring the original member countries over the new members of the Union.
To the maximum extent possible, we intend to participate in the abolition of all redundant obligations that threaten the existence of European Iče agriculture in comparison with the world.
Redirection of area subsidies to rural development programs.
In line with the trends of the European Union, we will support the idea of ​​agricultural subsidies as payments for ensuring the public interest, which is generally the care of the landscape and the environment.
In our opinion, the means for this is the redirection of a significant part of the existing area subsidies to rural development programs.
Liberalization of world agricultural trade.
Also on the ground of the European Union and the World Trade Organization (WTO), we intend to strive for a policy with a minimum of restrictions and regulation, and
support further liberalization of world agricultural trade.
We are for the abolition of export subsidies that exacerbate the problems of the developing world.
DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONS AND COMMUNITIES
We will simplify administration when distributing structural funds.
We are advocating the introduction of a transition period so that the Czech Republic can draw on European funds even after 2013.
We will ensure that the Czech Republic gets space for the completion of the water management infrastructure.
Electronicization of public administration.
We will support the systematic introduction of information and communication technologies in public administration.
The aim is for public administration bodies to exchange information electronically and reduce paperwork.
We will introduce digitization of processes in the field of spatial planning and building regulations.
Applicants for a zoning decision or a building permit will be able to submit an application electronically, including attachments, and will be able to check at any time what stage their application is in, or complete their application electronically.
Applicants will also be able to check whether the building authority made the same decision in their case as in a similar case and whether the decision-making process and decision in a similar case was the same as in a building authority in another city.
The newly introduced system will reduce the corrupt environment in the field of construction procedures to a minimum.
A simpler construction law.
We will submit a major amendment to the Construction Act to the Chamber of Deputies.
In this way, we will make life easier for all builders and remove the stupid things that got into the law during the social democratic governments.
Greater financial autonomy of municipalities.
Municipalities know best whether they need to build a kindergarten, repair a road, or build a new water supply.
We will reduce redistribution, replace non-entitlement subsidies from the state budget and transfer them directly to municipalities and cities.
In the following period, we will increase the income of all categories of municipalities by changing the law on the budget determination of taxes.
This change must not disadvantage either small or large municipalities.
She must be fair.
Transferred performance of state administration.
We will ensure full professional financing of the transferred performance of state administration.
We believe that when the state orders services from the municipalities within the framework of the connected model, it must also pay for them, so that the citizens of the municipalities do not have to pay extra for them.
In this way, we will gradually ensure the stabilization of property relations in rural municipalities.
Effective public administration.
We will support effective public administration that educates and rewards those with the skills and interest to work in the public sector.
On the contrary, we will give a clear signal to all those who only want to feed themselves in the state and municipalities with bureaucratic obstinacy or incompetence that there is no place for them in state services.
High-quality management of the authorities and their professional activity is not only a duty, but also a manifestation of respect for the citizens of our country.
foreign Relations
Safety,
prosperity and
freedom –
these are the three key words and goals that ODS has pursued in the past, and also the basic goals that we must and want to pursue in the future.
The Czech Republic is a medium-sized European country with an open and export-oriented economy.
Our freedom, independence, security and prosperity have always been related to the degree of our involvement in cooperation with the countries of the Western Circle of Civilization and in world trade exchange.
The goals of our policy do not change over time, but the means of their enforcement must take into account the real environment of today's world, which is different from twenty years ago and which will be different in ten years.
Today's environment is characterized by some redistribution of power accompanied by a relative weakening of US influence, internal consolidation and greater assertiveness of Russian policy, and the economic rise of China and India.
In recent years, the European Union has come up against the limits of its deepening and expansion, and it has been slow and difficult to push through reforms to strengthen its competitiveness in the world.
On the other hand, the globalized world is characterized by the uncertainty of some traditional and proven values.
The principles of freedom come into conflict with the requirements of security.
The free movement of people and immigration especially from Islamic and African countries are putting pressure on the cultural identity of our civilization.
Not only as a result of the current economic crisis, the unhealthy tendencies towards protectionism at the national level and towards social engineering at the European level are growing stronger.
The ODS response to this challenge must be a purposeful foreign policy program based on good neighborly relations in the region.
Transatlantic bond.
Strengthening the Euro-Atlantic link means strengthening freedom, as well as a starting point for concrete proposals in security and economic cooperation.
However, in the area of ​​security, we Europeans should take a far greater share of responsibility for our own defense as well as for peace, freedom, human rights and security in the world.
However, this should take place within NATO, not by weakening the Alliance and building the EU's own defense structures, because the current problems do not arise in the military structures of the Alliance, but in the political structures of the member states.
Liberalization of world trade.
In trade cooperation, the US and the EU must be the drivers of world trade liberalization.
The most important are investments in the future: in education, science, innovation, new technologies.
Compared to the rest of the world, our mineral and human resources are limited.
We can only compete thanks to faster technological progress.
Therefore, we consider cooperation in the field of education, science and technology to be an absolute strategic priority.
We can build future prosperity on it.
ODS and the European Union.
ODS has always understood and understands the European Union as an important pillar of the international position of the Czech Republic.
He considers it a path to economic prosperity as well as a platform for defining the common interests of European democratic states.
From this point of view, it is evident that ODS was, has and will be interested in a quality and efficient European Union.
The paths to achieving this goal generally vary.
From the point of view of ODS, the quality, level and position of the EU is determined by the quality and level of its internal decision-making processes.
For these reasons, however, we have reservations about adverse phenomena, which include federalist tendencies,
high degree of regulation,
striving for tax harmonization or
uniform immigration policy.
We believe that all the mentioned phenomena will have a negative impact on the citizens as a result.
That is why we demand a return to the roots.
We are for a single market space without barriers, for the free movement of people, goods and capital, for intergovernmental cooperation.
An alternative to European federalism.
The ODS must be a reform force that can formulate and, where possible, also promote an alternative vision of the EU to the dominant European federalism today.
Therein lies its unique value.
Opinions that the EU has found itself at a crossroads with its centralist management and over-regulation are starting to be heard more and more often.
The demand for a truly reformist pan-European political force can therefore be expected to grow further.
Even non-leftist political forces in the EU have succumbed to the spirit of political correctness and fashionable topics today.
They are afraid of clear positions and choose endless compromises of compromises.
Here is a new chance for ODS.
The new group (ECRG) in the EP and the subsequent European Alliance of Parties and Political Foundation are suitable tools for this.
Against protectionism and regulations.
The main problem areas in which a visible political alternative to the current development in the EU will have to be defined are distorted and insufficient democratic mechanisms, tendencies towards trade protectionism, costly agricultural policy, demographic decline, legal and illegal migration and, as a result, changing social and demographic map of Europe, exploiting topics such as human rights protection or global warming to introduce new regulations, state control and central planning.
EU enlargement.
ODS strives for the further expansion of the European Union as an area of ​​stability and economic prosperity based on democratic principles,
respect for peace rights and
free competition.
This is primarily about supporting the entry of the countries of the former Yugoslavia into the European Union.
The Western Balkans region has always been a hotbed of tension in European history.
Its stabilization, democratization and economic development could eliminate this risk for the first time.
However, it is imperative to resolve mutual disputes with neighbors before joining the European Union, so that this potential instability does not spill over into the EU.
Another country that currently has candidate status is Turkey.
As a long-term reliable member of NATO and the largest Muslim partner of Western states, it must not be relegated to the periphery.
Denying its access to the EU would certainly induce a leaning towards more radical Muslim countries, which could lead to the radicalization of Turkey itself and, as a result, to the reduction of the security of the EU itself.
At the same time, it cannot be overlooked that important energy routes are to pass through this state in the future, and its 80 million dollar market could be very attractive to our entrepreneurs.
However, it is important to meet the same requirements that are and have been imposed on other candidate countries.
Economic diplomacy.
Economic diplomacy is the promotion and defense of a country's economic interests.
The economization of international relations is generally becoming stronger with advancing globalization, for smaller and medium-sized states, including the Czech Republic, economic topics are extremely important, and in many bilateral relations they are completely dominant.
The Czech Republic is a country with a significantly open economy.
Supporting a liberal economic environment in international trade and removing tariff and non-tariff barriers is therefore in our vital interest.
Developmental cooperation.
The system of providing development aid must be more efficient and professional.
Thanks to this, we will be able to develop a unified concept that reflects political and economic priorities and interests.
Multilateral development cooperation - this is mainly our participation in the development cooperation of the European Union.
From the point of view of our interests, we should pursue two goals – on the one hand, to provide direct help and support to Czech entities that apply for contracts for the implementation of tenders announced by the European Commission,
and at the same time participate in the preparation of programs and assignments so that they correspond with our priorities and relate to areas where potential implementers from the Czech Republic have a good chance of success.
Czech Republic and Russia.
Russia is no longer the military power it was in the 20th century.
However, the invasion of Georgia showed that it does not hesitate to use weapons if it feels necessary.
However, Russia is an energy power.
Energy became the main instrument of his foreign policy.
And as the gas crisis in Ukraine showed, it is also very effective.
With one turn of the faucet, a significant part of Europe was paralyzed.
It is true that any attempts by Russia to gain more influence over the emerging states of the Soviet bloc, including the Czech Republic and with the help of the ČSSD and KSČM, are unacceptable to the ODS.
Therefore, we cannot ignore the largest country in the world.
We must find a certain "modus vivendi", based on mutual respect and pragmatic cooperation.
We must support the development of mutual trade on the basis of mutual benefit.
Any dependence of one subject on another without reciprocity is bad.
Russia will always be part of our energy and trade mix, but it must not be its monopoly representative.
ODS is for correct relations with all European states, including Russia.
However, he intends to promote a unique policy tied to belonging to Western civilization.
Human rights.
Since its inception, the Czech Republic has profiled itself as a country that is known for its consistent attitudes to the observance of human rights in the world.
Both the official Czech diplomacy through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and many non-profit organizations operating in many countries around the world are dedicated to this activity.
Hand in hand with increasing economic relations with non-democratic states, unfortunately, a certain form of tolerance for violations of basic human rights and freedoms is also growing.
ODS will always promote the human rights point of view when negotiating with these states.
We will continue to strengthen our relationship with Israel as the only truly democratic country in the Middle East.
We will continue to support dissident representatives of Cuba both in exile and directly in Cuba, opposition representatives in Belarus, dissident representatives of Burma and other non-democratic states.
Image of the Czech Republic in the world.
The glory we enjoyed after the fall of the Iron Curtain is gone.
The overthrow of the government in the middle of the EU presidency cast the reputation and image of the Czech Republic directly into the shadows.
The key to success is the restoration of an elementary consensus on foreign policy in the Czech political scene,
better coordination and reduction of departmentalism in our European and development policy
and finally more intensive contacts and cooperation with Czechs living abroad.
