The economic and political crisis as a product of capitalism hit the Czech Republic and our society hard.
The right-wing governments in the past election period were not able to solve the effects of these crises on the majority of the citizens of our country.
On the contrary, with their anti-social and anti-people policies, they contributed to a significant decline in industrial production, a high increase in unemployment and an increase in the basic cost of living.
According to the ideas of right-wing parties, people have to pay for the private capitalist profits of banks threatened by the economic crisis.
They are also supposed to bear the decisive weight of the national debt, which is a consequence of the bad management of all previous governments.
The essence of all the reform measures of these governments is also aimed at this.
The Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia rejects this policy because it is not in the interest of the majority of citizens of the Czech Republic.
The basic program goal of the KSČM is socialism,
a democratic society of free, equal citizens,
politically and economically pluralistic society,
in an economy with a key role of social ownership.
The Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia presents an election program for the elections to the Chamber of Deputies of the Parliament of the Czech Republic, in which it is based on the basic interests of the majority of the citizens of our country and presents a practical way of solving current economic, ecological and social problems.
Mutual solidarity and dignity are decisive for the Communist Party of Bohemia and Moravia.
1. Work for everyone for a fair wage
The KSČM refuses to passively consider the high rate of unemployment, the problems of school graduates, seniors and health-disadvantaged people in the Czech Republic.
KSČM does not agree with the unfair rate of evaluation for individual income groups.
KSČM therefore promotes:
Restoration of canceled jobs and creation of new jobs, especially for school graduates, long-term unemployed and also for the disabled (create at least 100,000 new jobs), creation of a state program for the creation of new jobs.
Preservation of the current Labor Code protecting the interests of employees in their unequal position vis-à-vis employers.
Inadmissibility of dismissals from the employment relationship without stating the reasons and consent of the trade unions.
Unemployment support extended for a period of one year.
In case of bankruptcy of companies, preferentially satisfy the wage claims of their employees.
Increase the payment of severance pay when jobs are cut.
Reduction of disproportionate salaries and rewards of senior managers in state-owned enterprises and senior officials in state offices and public administration.
Tie their rewards only to positive economic results.
Increasing the minimum wage gradually up to CZK 14,000.
Wage compensation paid by the employer even during the first three days of illness and when caring for a child.
Equal pay for women and men equal pay for equal work.
Development of employment in public services.
The principle of equal pay for equal work also in relation to foreign workers, so that their willingness to accept lower wages is not abused to reduce wages overall and displace domestic employees.
State support for businesses employing school graduates and the disabled.
2. No tolerance for limiting social security for all generations
As a result of the economic crisis and poor management of the state, there has been and will continue to be constant questioning and deterioration of the level of basic life security and the overall social situation of the majority of the population of the Czech Republic.
The basis of the KSČM's policy is to preserve the role of the state in financing the social network.
KSČM will therefore promote the following goals:
Stopping the increase in the retirement age for men at age 63 and for women below according to the number of children.
Maintaining a continuous, state-guaranteed pension as the basis of the pension system.
Rejects attempts to privatize pension insurance;
continue to allow supplementary pension insurance on a voluntary basis with a possible contribution from the employer.
Enact the category of minimum pension with its gradual increase up to Kč 10,000 per month.
Regular valuation of pensions according to the growth in the living costs of pensioners' households, inflation and the development of wages and salaries.
State regulation of the prices of gas, electricity, utility and drinking water, heat and fuel, the fight against their excessive increase.
State regulation of housing costs and so-called objectively regulated rents (set so that the rent amounts to a maximum of 45 crowns per square meter per month), strengthen the legal protection of tenants.
State support for the construction of starter and social housing, especially in the form of municipal housing with affordable rent.
Adopt the Social Housing Act and establish norms for socially necessary apartments.
Support for the construction of at least 40,000 apartments per year, of which 10,000 are cooperative apartments from building savings, including guarantees from the State Housing Development Fund, revitalization and reconstruction of the housing stock.
Amendment of the Act on Ownership of Apartments, introduction of the apartment register.
Extending interest-free loans for the purchase of an apartment, apartment renovation and home furnishings for young families, newlywed loans with state support.
Preservation of state support for building savings and mortgages.
Construction of homes and facilities for the elderly, including stationary facilities for the elderly requiring round-the-clock care and supervision, and preservation of current social facilities for the elderly.
Completely cancel the so-called regulatory health fees a
not increase patient co-payments;
eliminate the differences in drug surcharges so that they are affordable for citizens.
In the share of healthcare in GDP, reach the European average of 8% (today in the Czech Republic below 7% of GDP).
Renewal of the network of non-profit medical facilities (including hospitals), which will not operate on the basis of market principles, to ensure the availability of quality health care for citizens.
Restoring the availability of emergency services, medical and dental emergencies.
Do not allow further privatization of medical facilities and emergency services.
Ensure sufficient financing of the health care sector, enforce an increase in state payments for state insured persons.
Create a single public health insurance company,
ensure consistent state control of the use of money in the healthcare sector.
Do not reduce contributions to health, pension and sickness insurance and state employment policy, completely abolish its ceiling for people with high incomes.
Create a social fund for the self-employed, small and small entrepreneurs in case of longer-term economic problems.
3. Basics of the fight against the economic crisis – market regulation, investment in science, education and new technologies
The current setting of direct and indirect taxes favors high-income groups at the expense of the vast majority of the Czech Republic's population.
KSČM therefore considers it necessary and at the same time fundamental to change the tax policy of the state.
In order to increase the income of the state budget of the Czech Republic and the future growth of the economy as a whole, to get out of the economic crisis and the indebtedness of the state, state investments in perspective fields, in science and research and support of Czech agriculture are necessary.
In this way, the necessary structural changes in the economy can be achieved.
KSČM therefore promotes:
Abolish the super-gross wage as a vague and fraudulent way of calculating employee income.
Change in the tax system:
return the reduced VAT rate from 10% to 5% for basic necessities, ecological public transport and introduce a zero VAT rate for basic food and medicines,
introduce a graduated tax on the income of natural persons in five bands with a reduction of this tax to 9% for incomes lower than the average gross monthly wage in the Czech Republic and up to 40% tax for incomes higher than 1 million CZK per year,
introduce two tax bands for legal entities according to annual profit (24% up to CZK 10 million of annual profit, 32% above CZK 10 million of annual profit),
the gradual preparation of the environmental tax (CO emissions, energy consumption) with a return to energy savings for households,
maintain the exemption from inheritance tax for the transfer of smaller assets up to 4 million CZK, for the transfer of larger assets restore the inheritance tax including progression,
tax dividends at 25%,
exempt from taxation the interest on deposits of the population.
Introduce asset declarations for assets over CZK 10 million.
Ban anonymous registered shares by law and make the ownership structure of companies more transparent.
Improve financial security for the development of regions, cities and municipalities, help the state in debt relief of municipalities.
Tighten the government's responsibility for the exercise of the state's ownership rights in enterprises with a state-owned share.
Use the profits of large state-owned enterprises to strengthen the income and investments of the state budget.
Stop the privatization of state property.
Carry out a buyback of shares by the state in a strategic area (energy, communications, public transport, water, sewerage, extraction of raw materials).
Support the establishment of enterprises with a majority share of the state or municipalities and regions in strategic areas of the national economy and services.
Establish public economic reconstruction funds for strategic management of public investments.
Review the policy of state incentives for private investments, focus them primarily on job creation.
To support the purchase by the state of failing enterprises in prospective decisive sectors of the national economy.
Significantly increase public support for individual, small and small businesses.
To create a Czech bank with a decisive ownership interest of the state for the purpose of providing guaranteed loans and credits to entrepreneurs.
Reduce the administrative burden for the self-employed, small and small entrepreneurs.
To strengthen the role and service of the state so that to a greater extent Czech exports are also oriented outside the EU and the USA, to prevent excessive dependence of the Czech economy on foreign capital, to expand trade and economic relations with the rapidly growing economies of the world.
Tighten the regulation of the financial sector, especially speculation with foreign money, limit the scope and amount of bank fees.
Limit the coercive practices of business chains, especially towards suppliers of agricultural products from the Czech Republic.
Limit the construction of large logistics centers in the Czech Republic, which require further acquisition of agricultural land in particular.
Support funding of science and applied research in perspective fields (eg information technology, microelectronics, biotechnology and qualified chemistry, selected engineering branches).
Gradually allocate up to 3% of GDP to science and research by 2012.
A unified state energy concept, ensuring the energy security of the Czech Republic with a decisive share of nuclear electricity production (promote the start of the construction of the 3rd and 4th blocks of the Temelín NPP, the modernization of the Dukovany NPP) with an increase in the share of renewable energy sources and a reduction in the energy intensity of both production and consumption.
State support of businesses in prospective industries.
Modernization of transport infrastructure, especially railways;
to regularize public mass transport,
promote a system of various types of fare discounts (family, group, pensioners, students, children, disabled).
Return a significant portion of freight traffic back to rail.
Remove long-distance heavy freight transport from bypass routes around highways, expressways and from 2nd and 3rd class roads.
To protect and support Czech agriculture.
Promote the restoration of food self-sufficiency, the growth of agricultural production and the gradual increase in the export of agricultural products.
To provide long-term support to the key industry - cattle breeding and dairy production.
Permanently equal conditions for Czech farmers within the EU; tax reliefs for Czech farmers when purchasing state land in times of crisis.
Care for the countryside and the good living conditions of its inhabitants, job opportunities, availability of services, transport accessibility of rural settlements.
Change in the budgetary determination of taxes in favor of smaller municipalities.
Establish effective consumer protection against low-quality products and unfair business practices.
Strengthen the position of the Czech Trade Inspection, the Czech Agricultural and Food Inspection, and the Hygienic Service of the Czech Republic.
4 Healthy environment and sustainable development
Environmental protection and sustainable development are important for the preservation of our planet,
therefore, within each state, it is necessary to pay careful attention to the maintenance and improvement of the environment.
KSČM promotes:
Compliance with the ban on importing waste from abroad for storage and disposal in the Czech Republic.
Protection of drinking water sources and restoration of water sources.
Caring for water in the landscape and slowing down its runoff.
Protection of biodiversity and landscape, limitation of its fragmentation.
Protection of agricultural land and greenery, support for recultivation, remediation and effective measures against soil pollution.
Planting of more diverse forests;
defining the elements of the territorial system of ecological stability in territorial plans and the implementation of these plans.
Legislative, economic and other instruments to solve the long-term bad state of the air in a large part of the territory of the Czech Republic.
Determine socially acceptable and proportionate limits to the extraction of mineral resources.
Financing comprehensive flood protection measures and adaptation to climate change.
Support for a safe nuclear program with the goal of gradually reducing the share of fossil fuels in energy production.
Support of environmentally friendly modes of transport, especially combined transport, inland water transport and rail transport.
Continue to modernize and electrify the railway; the completion of under construction railway corridors and the overall renewal of the railway network.
In cities, increase the share of ecological buses, trolleybuses, trams and, in Prague, the metro in public transport.
Make the construction of transport structures cheaper (not at the expense of their quality), e.g. highways, expressways and bypasses of cities and municipalities, assess the completion of unfinished sections from the point of view of public interest.
Continue the construction and modernization of wastewater treatment plants and sewage systems.
Ecological agriculture, ecological landscaping and urban planning.
Guarantee the rights of citizens to be informed about the ecological impacts of economic activity and buildings and the right to participate in joint decision-making on the environment.
To understand hunting, fishing, beekeeping, animal husbandry and gardening was also part of nature protection.
5. Family — the basis of satisfaction, children and youth — hope for the future
The family is an important foundation of society, it should reflect a stable bond between parents and children.
Children are the future of our nation and state.
That is why it is important to pay attention to the full-fledged standard of life of the family and individuals, the upbringing of children in the family and in society.
Young people need help when entering life.
KSČM therefore supports:
Construction of affordable apartments for young families.
Helping young families by providing newlywed loans.
An increase in parental leave benefits to CZK 14,000 per month, with the provision that this increased remuneration will belong to mothers caring for a child under three years of age; introduction of the possibility of additional parental leave being taken by grandparents.
Higher support for the birth of a second child and another child (maternity allowance, parental allowance, child allowance).
Allowances to be linked to the child and not to household income.
Valorize child benefits, parental allowance and foster care benefits according to the cost of living.
Improve services for families, children, disabled citizens and the elderly that these families care for, in line with European standards.
Eliminate stereotypes, legislative and technical barriers deepening social exclusion of disabled people, financial compensation to families that help disabled people overcome this exclusion.
Improve and expand family education in schools.
Restoration of preventive medical and dental examinations in schools.
Legal protection of employees who care for minor children.
Economic assistance to families who take part in the care of disabled persons.
The right to a first job for young school leavers; introduce potential tax breaks for employers who provide their first job after leaving school.
To create conditions for financially accessible extracurricular activities, for the activities of leisure centers, schools, libraries, physical education facilities, civic associations and organizations for children and youth.
Pay maximum attention to crime prevention, anti-drug prevention, restriction of gambling halls, casinos and games of chance and relevant education.
Consistently implement the Convention on the Rights of the Child in legislation and in practice.
Alternative culture and lifestyles that have a humanistic character.
Savings system for children to start their households with state support.
Legislative measures should also be assessed from the point of view of the impact on women and children.
6. Upbringing, education, culture and sport
The educational system ensuring education and upbringing, family upbringing, culture, sports and physical education are important parts of every human society.
An educated nation, aware of its own history and valuing its own culture, has the prerequisites for its successful development.
The KSČM is fully aware of this fact, which is why it places great emphasis and promotes in its political activities:
Program for the construction and renovation of crèches and kindergartens;
create conditions for 100% attendance of children in the last preschool year.
Introduction of free kindergarten attendance for the next year (4-year-olds).
Strengthening public education, financed from public sources as the predominant basis of the educational system at all levels;
to finance private and church education from their own resources.
Strengthening the function of the state and founders as well as their responsibility for the conditions and results of school work.
Adjustment of the rights and obligations of pupils and legal representatives.
Optimizing educational documents, improving the quality of textbooks, teaching texts and methodologies.
Education against all forms of discrimination and intolerance, including racism and neo-fascism.
Interdepartmental coordination of improving the quality of education in the field of special education, ensuring work with pupils outside of classes.
Rejection of tuition in any form at all levels of public schools.
Substantial support for the development of apprenticeships and secondary vocational education, especially in fields that are in short supply and in demand, including secondary agricultural vocational education.
In the apprenticeship network, create conditions for the free provision of protective equipment for practical training, for practice related to the field, adequate wages during the practice and prevent the abuse of apprentices as cheap labor.
Ensure financially affordable meals in school canteens, free stay in school groups and school clubs, support of financially affordable hobby activities at schools.
Create and materially ensure a system of social and benefit scholarships for university students;
to prevent the payment of the accommodation allowance directly to students leading to a reduction of the state allowance for dormitories and to an actual increase in the prices of dormitories and menz.
State merit scholarship for university students with a GPA of up to 1.5 up to CZK 5,000 per month.
An increase in the number of publicly subsidized dormitories and hostels as well as cheap catering facilities for students.
To ensure the recognition of study programs and diplomas of Czech higher education institutions on a pan-European level.
To prevent further devaluation of higher education, caused primarily by its extensive development, to focus attention on the quality of universities.
Strengthening the role of universities in research and development.
The development of lifelong learning, including the adoption of the Law on Lifelong Learning.
Substantial increase in requirements for accreditation and state supervision of the quality of educational institutions and facilities operating in the field of lifelong learning.
Financial availability of cultural and sports events.
Original Czech artistic creation of all forms, protection of cultural heritage including movable and immovable monuments connected with national history, their financing at least in the amount of at least 2% of state budget expenditures for the department of culture (excluding church expenditures).
Non-professional types of culture and related institutions, national and folk traditions.
Use tax policy to stimulate sponsors of cultural activities.
Ensure that there is no economic, political and opinion discrimination in the culture;
support young artists and creators with an appropriate state grant policy and timely provision of grants.
Development of sports and mass physical education and physical activities, adoption of the state concept of support for sports and physical education and the new law on sports.
Creation of conditions for the activity of voluntary civic sports associations.
Do not allow further giving of property to churches, enforce the restitution point.
7. Legal guarantees for citizens — prevent injustice
The safety of citizens, their protection from crime, the legal certainty of obtaining their rights is an important social goal that must be secured by the state.
KSČM promotes:
Availability of legal protection of citizens, timeliness of decisions of judicial authorities and enforceability of law.
Speed ​​up and simplify court proceedings without prejudice to the rights of the parties to the proceedings.
Judicial supervision of enforcement.
Legislation to limit usury.
Measures that will lead to an increase in the clarity of criminal activity and to the prevention of crime.
Simplify the court system to a three-tier system and strengthen the role of the public prosecutor's office, introduce general supervision of legality.
Punitive liability of judges and prosecutors and action against violations of their duties.
Increasing the legal protection of the state's economic interests.
Measures against organized crime and corruption and their penetration into state, public and political structures.
Combating any manifestations of neo-Nazism and fascism, preventive measures and punishment of manifestations of racism, discrimination and xenophobia, also against minorities and foreigners.
Consistent non-partisanship of the Police of the Czech Republic;
tighten the selection of applicants for police work,
substantially increase the professional level of all parts of the police,
to stabilize components combating serious economic crime.
More cops on the streets
to increase supervision of the observance of public order, especially in places with a higher incidence of criminal activity.
Renewal of the proven management structure of the Police of the Czech Republic, including regional and local precincts, cooperation and coordination of the activities of the state and municipal police.
Better management and coordination of all parts of the Integrated Rescue System, including cooperation with military units during emergencies;
refusal to commercialize individual parts of the system.
Development of the activities of civic associations with a focus on rescue and humanitarian activities.
Involvement of the insurance industry in the creation of financial resources for better material and technical equipment of rescue services.
Thorough investigation of all government and public procurement and materiel management issues, including cases involving the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Defence.
8. Democracy and human rights — KSČM as a guarantee of democracy
A democratic form of government, the widest possible application of direct democracy is inextricably linked with respect for basic human rights.
It is not about their general and formal proclamations, but their actual application.
Therefore, the KSČM promotes:
Fill the Constitution of the Czech Republic with the adoption of the Act on the General Referendum.
To strengthen the parliamentary character of the Czech Republic.
Strengthen the elements of direct democracy in the decision-making of municipalities and regions, use the institution of general referendums, local and regional referendums and simplify the conditions for their announcement.
Maintain the proportional electoral system in elections to the Chamber of Deputies and regional and municipal councils.
The law also guarantees the proportional formation of their bodies.
Enact the loss of a member's mandate if they leave the political party or movement or their political program for which they were elected, thus preventing defection.
Apply the political and legal responsibility of public officials for the performance of their functions,
to expand the range of mutually incompatible functions in state administration, self-government and state-owned enterprises.
Strengthen the decision-making powers of councils of municipalities, cities and regions vis-à-vis councils.
Direct election of the president without weakening the parliamentary character of the Czech Republic.
Simplification of the system of state administration, including the number and scope of activities of state authorities.
Consistent protection of freedom of speech, scientific research and artistic expression.
Full application of social, trade union and employment rights.
Support for the free association of citizens, rich associational activities and various forms of civic activities.
Equal opportunities for women and men, including greater representation of women in decision-making processes; support of the women's movement and women's interest organizations.
Independent and public control of the media through media councils elected by parliament on the principle of political balance;
strictly follow the codes in the media.
Restriction and regulation of lobbying according to legal rules.
9. Equal access to information
We live in an information society.
A large amount of information and data is accessible today through a wide variety of different media.
One of the most widespread information media is the Internet.
We support its expansion so that it serves citizens and companies and facilitates, for example, their contact with the authorities.
In this area, the KSČM supports:
Equal access to the use of information technology in all areas of social life, especially in education, public administration and self-government.
Providing public places with free Internet access within libraries, schools and other public institutions.
Instruction in the handling of information technologies at all levels of the educational system, including, for example, the organization of free courses for senior citizens.
Preservation of public television and radio;
cancellation of concession fees and financing of these public media with a share from the state budget.
Ensuring quick and objective information to citizens through public media.
Broadcasting in literary Czech;
development of the sector of public information provided free of charge.
Adoption of the Act on the Czech Language.
Public service development in digital multiplexes;
support for the creation of non-commercial educational programs disseminated via television, radio and the Internet.
Regulation of monopolies favoring large corporations in the field of development and transfer of information.
Shorten the terms of copyright protection of scientific and artistic works.
Achieving that the citizen can conduct all communication with the authorities (tax returns, applications, extracts from the registers) also in electronic form with a guarantee that the information obtained in this way will be used in the manner with which the citizen has expressed consent.
Ensure that the citizen can handle everything in a single place; consistent sharing of public registers.
The KSČM rejects militarization, arms races, various military adventures, perceives their possible dangers and negative impacts on the financial and other resources of the state and society.
The citizens of our country want to live in peace.
The KSČM therefore promotes and demands:
Consistently apply the UN Charter, in particular strengthen the key role of the UN, respect and
compliance with international law for all countries, especially in crisis situations.
Exclusion of security risks with priority decision-making by the UN Security Council in crisis situations.
Reject any efforts to trample on the sovereignty of all states.
Reduce spending on excessive and pointless armaments, which burdens the state budget and yet does not provide a guarantee for the defense of the Czech Republic.
Provide saved resources for the development of education, healthcare and other social areas.
Stop the participation of the Czech Republic and its army in foreign military missions of the USA and NATO, which harm peace, human rights and democracy in the world.
Reject the deployment of foreign armed forces, military bases or a command post, e.g. for the considered components of the new American missile defense plan, on the territory of the Czech Republic.
Ending the validity of the NATO strategy, which includes the "right of preventive strikes" and acting outside the borders of member countries even without the mandate of international law.
Suspend the Czech Republic's membership in NATO's military and security structures and subsequently withdraw from NATO.
Equal status of the Czech Republic and other small member states within the EU.
Reject the creation of force structures intended primarily for actions outside the territory of EU member states according to the EU's common foreign and security policy.
To achieve that the Army of the Czech Republic primarily fulfills the tasks of defense of the Czech Republic.
Consistent opposition to all forms of terrorism, including state terrorism.
Create a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in Central Europe.
Reject any interference by foreign pressure groups, including associations of expelled Germans, in the internal affairs of the Czech Republic, and questioning the decrees of President Beneš.
Application of the principle of the inviolability of state borders, rejection of separatist efforts violating the arrangement of Europe after World War II.
