WE WANT THAT
Our road is red and green
Do we want a society where the gap between rich and poor grows wider,
where large corporations and banks gain so much power that they threaten democracy,
and where pollution of our shared planet leads to violent climate change and people on the run?
Or should we stick to the fact that we want a society where everyone has equal opportunities for a good life with education, health and a safe old age?
Where unfair monopolies, tax havens and greed are fought?
And where we take care of the climate and not least of each other, regardless of what conditions we were born with?
In SF, we know what we choose!
We are a red and green party that will change Denmark and create hope for future generations.
Denmark must once again be a leading green country.
We must set the course and not just hesitatingly follow suit.
It is absolutely essential that we take better care of the environment, develop green solutions and take the lead in the climate fight.
Everyone should have the same opportunity to pursue their dreams, regardless of their background.
That is why we want to strengthen welfare and combat increasing inequality.
We must stand together and take responsibility for the weakest in Denmark and in the world.
We want to do away with the stress society.
Children and young people must not be bombarded with tests and towering expectations, and our work must make room for family life.
In short, much more calm is needed.
At the same time, we want to strengthen democracy,
Denmark's commitment to the EU
and the international struggle for human rights.
That is why SF is going to the election to secure a new red-green government that can move Denmark forward and ensure that we both take care of the environment and strengthen the welfare society, so that everyone comes along.
We can create a better future.
The way forward is red and green.
Do you want to join?
WORKING LIFE
The unemployed and sick must have an outstretched hand
A good working life is both about proper working and salary conditions, and about the fact that you as a person must meet an outstretched hand if you become unemployed or ill.
SF will abolish the poverty-creating cash assistance ceiling,
improve the unemployment benefit coverage rate,
and ensure that citizens on the edge of the labor market get a number of rights vis-à-vis the system, so that sick citizens are not retained in hopeless resource processes or left without effort.
There must be more focus on education and upskilling in the employment system.
In the coming years, Denmark will lack skilled labour, and at the same time part of the unskilled jobs will disappear due to technological development.
Education, upskilling and continuing education should therefore be central to employment efforts, just as companies must take responsibility for continuing education and retraining opportunities for their employees.
Strengthen the working environment - including the psychological one
All employees deserve a healthy and safe workplace.
But it is unfortunately going the wrong way with both the physical and psychological working environment.
More wage earners suffered from musculoskeletal disorders in 2016 than in 2002.
The same goes for the mental strain.
At the same time, the Norwegian Working Environment Authority's grants are falling on one finance act after another.
SF will reverse the trend and give the Norwegian Working Environment Authority more muscle.
We want to increase the authority's grant by DKK 80 million annually.
At the same time, SF works for a real equality of the psychological working environment with the physical.
A national action plan for psychological working environment should be drawn up, public managers must have a mandatory course in ensuring a good psychological working environment, and the Norwegian Working Environment Authority's hotline for sexual harassment and bullying must be expanded to include all forms of poor psychological working environment.
Wage earners must have more security
Over many years, the unemployment benefit coverage rate has been eroded, and the unemployment benefit period shortened.
SF wants to give employees more security and improve the coverage rate of unemployment benefits.
We propose to start with a 25 percent higher unemployment benefit in the first two months for people who have been employed for a longer period of time.
This particular group may find that they do not get enough out of paying into the social security fund, because they believe that the unemployment benefit rate is too low, or because they do not expect to become unemployed.
The more people opt out, or fail to opt in, to a social security fund, the higher the risk of undermining the solidarity system in the long term.
SF will strengthen the Danish model by increasing the right to tax deductions for dues to the collective bargaining unions and removing the right to deductions for dues at "trade unions" that have neither signed a collective agreement for at least 25 percent of their members nor are members of a main organization where a collective agreement has been concluded for over 25 percent of the members.
In this way, we strengthen the incentive to join the trade unions which have a society-supporting function.
No thanks to social dumping
Work in Denmark must take place on Danish wage and working conditions.
SF will fight social dumping, where employers take advantage of Eastern European workers by underpaying them, letting them work illegally and at the same time flouting the Working Environment Act.
This kind of unacceptable and greedy employer behavior exploits the Eastern European workers and gives them miserable conditions.
This exposes Danish wage earners to unfair competition.
Construction, the hotel and service industry and the transport industry are areas that are heavily exposed to social dumping.
SF is working to ensure that the joint authority effort between SKAT, the Norwegian Working Environment Authority and the police is made permanent and that additional funds are provided.
In the area of ​​transport, SF has come up with several proposals for tighter controls.
Higher fines, better enforcement of driving-rest regulations and tighter cabotage rules.
When public authorities offer work to private companies, it should always be done with demands for wages, working hours and other working conditions as normal in Denmark.
OLD LIFE
Rising retirement age should not wear us down
Not all wage earners can live up to the ever-increasing retirement age.
This applies especially to people with hard physical work, typically skilled and unskilled, who become worn out before they reach retirement age.
And the problem has gotten bigger since the retirement pay was phased out.
There is therefore a need for a comprehensive effort, which is both about a better working environment, better opportunities for further training and a change of direction and, not least, better retirement opportunities.
SF wants a model for retirement, where those worn out on the labor market are allowed to retire earlier and can have a dignified old age.
It is also unreasonable for early pensioners to have their benefit deducted if they have a partner or spouse who works.
SF advocates that the early retirement pension should not depend on the cohabitant's or spouse's income.
More hands in elderly care
The number of elderly citizens will increase significantly in the coming years.
Therefore, we need to ensure that we can also take care of everyone who needs it in the future.
It requires that there are enough employees.
SF has proposed a halt to cuts in care for the elderly until 2021, so that the municipalities are compensated for the fact that there are more elderly people.
The money must of course be earmarked for strengthening the elderly area.
It is crucial that we secure more hands so that we can ensure proper care for the elderly.
Permanent teams, less privatization
We are strongly critical of the privatization of care for the elderly.
We must avoid more sad situations where vulnerable elderly suddenly find themselves without help and care as a result of bankruptcies.
Therefore, we will have stronger requirements for financial solidity and the use of trained personnel for private providers in elderly care.
The needs of the individual citizen must always be at the center.
We suggest introducing permanent teams of employees so that new faces do not enter the elderly's home every day.
It will give more security to those who help in everyday life.
At the same time, we must drop unnecessary documentation, so that the employees can spend their time on what they are trained for.
And last, but not least, we must ensure that the elderly get the help they themselves want to prioritize.
More support for people with dementia and their relatives
As we live longer, more people will be affected by dementia.
A broad effort is needed for people with dementia and their relatives, with much better investigation and diagnosis and more support for relatives with dementia living at home.
We must have raised the quality of the care that citizens with dementia receive in home care, in nursing homes and in care centers, among other things with more professionals and trained staff at the care centers.
An active senior life
We must ensure good opportunities for older people to continue with an active working and leisure life if they can and want to.
With a number of sensible and adapted senior schemes, older people must be able to continue in the labor market if they can and want to.
And then it must be easier for older citizens to use their qualifications in voluntary work in the local community.
CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE
All children should have a good start
Good nurseries, day care providers and kindergartens play an absolutely crucial role in relation to children's early learning and development.
Therefore, we must ensure that there is time to help all children on their way in the first important years.
The daycare centers contribute to a large extent to counteracting negative social inheritance among the children who come from families with limited resources.
At the same time, they are important for the integration of children with other ethnic backgrounds.
SF works for a good, safe and stimulating children's life with proper standards and trained staff in nurseries, kindergartens and day care.
We want to ensure that all children develop skills through play and learning and are challenged personally, linguistically and motorically.
This requires, among other things, that there are enough adults in daycare centers.
SF fights for minimum standards.
There should never be more than six children per adult in kindergartens and three in nurseries.
More play and learning in free time
When the school day is over, there must be plenty of opportunities for children and young people.
Space to play and learn.
The standards in after-school programs and leisure centers must be significantly better.
There should be a maximum of nine children per adult.
And then we should extend the opening hours in after-school schemes, leisure centers and clubs, so that the leisure communities can take up more space during the day.
It is crucial that all parents can afford to send their children to an after-school program.
Therefore, there must be a ceiling on the parental payment in after-school arrangements of 40 percent.
We know how important adolescence is and how important it is that all young people have the opportunity to meet competent adults who have time to guide them and in whom the young people can trust.
Here, clubs with skilled adults and exciting offers can make a big difference.
Children and young people must have good after-school arrangements, leisure centers and club facilities, regardless of where in the country they live. A significant boost is needed in the entire area.
Vulnerable children and young people
We have a special responsibility to help vulnerable children, young people and their families.
In SF, we particularly focus on early intervention, so that vulnerable families are not left to fend for themselves, but are followed closely, e.g. through a strengthening of health care and massive support to make family life work.
And then we must ensure that the children are guided into good daycare services from an early age.
The municipalities must use the good experience gained in a number of places with parent training courses and a holistic approach (the Swedish/Herning model), where the number of cases with the individual social worker is reduced and cross-sector work with vulnerable children and young people in close cooperation with both institutions and schools.
The municipalities should have a strong PPR department that can ensure support and guidance for exposed and vulnerable children and young people, a well-developed SSP collaboration and preferably associated social workers to all daycare centers and schools;
and then, for God's sake, the municipalities must not just "give up" on their vulnerable young people when they turn 18.
The municipalities must actively work with the use of aftercare – not just for previously placed children and young people, but all vulnerable young people – so that the offers of support they have had are continued where it makes sense, so that they are not lost on the floor.
It is absolutely crucial that you ensure them a way forward in life in the form of youth education, jobs, housing etc.
Aftercare has many faces. In addition to a transfer of the support received before the age of 18, it can take the form of special adult support for young people who are tired of the "treatment culture" that vulnerable children and young people have encountered growing up.
The most important thing is not the shape, but, as mentioned, that the young people are not dropped on the floor and that good adult contact is ensured.
The children in our daycare centers must never feel let down, but educators only have two hands.
That is why we must have minimum norms: Never more than six children per adult in the kindergartens and three in the nurseries.
CITY AND RESIDENCE
More good homes at reasonable prices
There is a need for more, good public housing at a reasonable price.
This applies to both youth housing, elderly housing and family housing.
The rent must be lower in the new public housing, which is far too expensive.
It is especially a widespread problem in the big cities.
At the same time, we want to secure money to maintain and renovate older public housing.
It is good that we as a society have a range of different housing types: Owner, rent, share, etc.
But private rental housing must be regulated so that we can prevent rents from becoming too high.
Our homes must be in good energy condition.
It makes sense both economically and in relation to the climate.
That is why SF works for better advice on energy and support for insulation, energy-efficient windows and climate-friendly forms of heating such as district heating and electric pumps.
Mixed housing ensures that we meet at intersections
Housing policy is crucial for the cohesion of society.
When we live side by side, we also meet at crossroads. In schools, daycare centers and association life.
It is therefore crucial that the housing types are mixed, so that public housing is located side by side with owner-occupied housing.
For far too long, politicians have watched while the most vulnerable citizens have been relegated to the same uniform residential areas, crowded together far away from the "nice citizenry".
Therefore, there are areas in Denmark where there is a large over-representation of people with social or economic challenges, while other areas are completely devoid of that side of society.
In SF, we believe that it is important both for each individual citizen and for the cohesion of society that people meet each other regardless of income, culture and ethnicity.
In local communities, schools, leisure clubs and at workplaces.
That is why SF wants more general housing construction in the wealthiest areas of the country, and in the Folketing we have for many years worked against citizens with the lowest incomes congregating in certain residential areas.
A Denmark that hangs together
In a small country like Denmark, we must ensure a reasonable balance between country and city.
In many outlying areas there is a lack of work, falling house prices and a large exodus of people of working age.
In SF, we have a number of proposals to future-proof the Danish rural districts:
Better loan options in the outer areas, i.a. through the establishment of a special mortgage credit institution.
Creation of a number of local welfare centres.
More support for the demolition of dilapidated houses in rural areas.
All of Denmark must have access to fast broadband internet.
A travel team that will go around the country and advise on the potential in the local areas.
Better support for micro-enterprises and entrepreneurs.
Shared municipal tax, so taxable persons pay municipal tax in the municipalities in Denmark where they own a year-round residence.
More "educational satellites" within certain areas of education in the outlying areas and a distribution policy in the high school area that ensures the preservation of the smaller high schools in the outlying areas.
Far more Danes will have less than an hour's travel time by public transport to the upcoming super-light trains.
It must be mandatory for politicians to carry out analyzes of the consequences of proposed legislation for the country's outermost regions.
An action plan that does not only focus on the relocation of government jobs, but instead works purposefully to improve the framework conditions in the country's outer regions, rural areas and islands and creates a better balance between rural and urban areas.
BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY
Technology for a sustainable future
Danish companies must be at the forefront when it comes to the green transition and other areas where there is an increasing societal need for new technology and new products.
A combination of research, targeted business support and future-oriented requirements in, for example, the environment must ensure that Danish companies come up with the first good solution, which can subsequently be exported and create jobs in Denmark.
The windmill adventure shows that this strategy works.
Danish business is also strong on heat supply, energy savings and water technology.
Education, health and transport are other areas in rapid development and with great potential to improve our lives through technological solutions.
We must help the companies to be winners in the long run rather than, like the bourgeois government, just going after the lowest costs in the short term.
Good education is also important for companies.
There is a particular need for more skilled workers.
The social safety net for entrepreneurs must be strengthened, and it must be easier to run an employee-owned or -managed company.
SF wants strict regulation of the financial sector so that we avoid future financial crises.
And then there must be a ceiling on the contributions to the mortgage sector, which is characterized by lax competition and excessively large profits.
Freedom and community in a tech age
We are facing a significant change in our labor market.
The future offers exponential technological development.
Robots, artificial intelligence and machines will take over much of the work we know today.
That development is amazing!
But if it is not to end in increased inequality and threaten our welfare model, it is imperative that we ensure a more equal and fair redistribution of money, time and influence.
In this way, we can have more time for what really matters: peace, closeness, care and time for each other.
Technology gives us new opportunities to share the resources we have, such as cars, apartments or labour.
The sharing economy and platform economy have the potential to contribute to more sustainable consumption, but we must ensure that the new services that are emerging are not used as a smokescreen for social dumping or tax evasion.
That is why we also work towards sharing economy work being organised, on an equal footing with ordinary work.
EU
FOR A GREEN AND SOLIDARITY EUROPE
SF is an EU-committed party with a strong green, solidarity and international profile.
Common solutions in the EU are our best and most effective answer when Europe is challenged by climate change, refugee flows, tax fraud, social dumping and poverty.
The EU gives us a unique opportunity to tie the European labor markets together and improve social conditions across borders.
But right now there is too much focus on the market and too little on employee conditions.
SF wants a social Europe with a balance between the market and the community and high environmental and social standards.
A number of major revelations of tax cheating have shown the huge societal problem we have with tax evasion.
The rampant and harmful capitalism must be brought under control, but the problem is systemic and can only be solved together with other countries.
The EU must work for a European and global regulatory framework and control system, where authorities work together across borders to uncover fraud and collect tax.
The EU must show the way for the whole world and ensure an ambitious climate plan.
SF will, together with our green party in Europe, be at the forefront of the fight for the reduction of greenhouse gases, conversion to green energy and sustainable agriculture, stop harmful chemicals and for nature and biodiversity.
The EU was hit hard by the refugee crisis in 2015, and the tremors have not yet subsided.
The crisis revealed a need to fundamentally change the refugee system.
But it must not happen by closing quota refugees and turning the EU's back.
On the contrary, EU cooperation is a prerequisite for the problem to be handled.
SF's bid is a humane and practical approach with greater focus on the reasons why refugees and migrants come to Europe.
DISABILITY AND INCLUSION
Citizens with disabilities must have every opportunity to participate
Citizens with a physical or mental disability must be able to live a dignified, respectful and active life with the same opportunities as citizens without disabilities.
SF works for better educational opportunities, a spacious labor market and more disabled-friendly housing.
In addition, we must continue to work with full accessibility and broad access to communication and information for citizens with disabilities.
The UN's Disability Convention is an important benchmark for disability policy in SF.
Availability:
There must be a right to individual expression and residence.
We must not go back to gathering citizens with disabilities in large central institutions, as we see a tendency towards.
Accessibility for the disabled must be strengthened in relation to the planning of the physical space and access to public services in the area of ​​health, among other things.
Training:
It is important that the work with inclusion in the primary school does not become a cost-cutting exercise, and that the necessary special services continue to be available in the municipalities.
Labor market:
We must have an open and inclusive labor market with the right to rehabilitation.
Only 50 percent of citizens with a disability are connected to the labor market.
SF will lift the rehabilitation effort for citizens with disabilities and ensure a coordinated and coherent effort.
Health services:
Citizens with a mental disability must have the same rights as citizens with physical disorders.
This applies not least in relation to the treatment guarantee and waiting time.
And then we as a society must limit and preferably avoid coercion in psychiatry.
INTERNATIONAL AND DEFENSE
Development, democracy and human rights
The world is experiencing extreme and increasing global inequality.
The poorest are getting poorer.
And it is the very poorest countries that face the greatest consequences of climate change and refugee and migrant flows.
At the same time, the richest countries are closing in on themselves.
This also applies to Denmark, which under the bourgeois government has used aid funds on the reception of refugees in Denmark and on short-term solutions in the surrounding areas.
SF will change that.
We must once again have development aid that is focused on the very poorest and that focuses on creating equality and promoting human rights.
It will be a long and tough journey, but only in this way can we achieve a world in better balance.
With fewer conflicts and fewer reasons to flee.
The SDGs are central to Danish development aid and also to SF's political work.
In particular, the goals of global equality must be much clearer in Danish aid.
SF again wants Danish aid to be 1 percent of Danish GNI.
The world can only achieve the goals if the rich countries contribute to financing them and if there is a better connection between the EU's and the European countries' development aid and the other policy areas such as fisheries and trade.
It is no use giving aid with one hand and creating trade barriers with the other.
SF believes that Denmark must recognize Palestine as a state.
Therefore, the EU should also live up to its responsibility as a trading partner and hit Israeli exports by suspending the association agreement with Israel as long as Israel does not respect human rights and continues to build the illegal settlements.
International trade must also benefit poor countries
Denmark benefits greatly from international trade.
It provides jobs and exports.
But free trade is under pressure from the United States in particular, which puts America First.
In SF, we will strengthen the global, agreement-based system through the world trade organization WTO.
It benefits us, and it benefits the world's poorest countries, which are typically not part of the regional trade agreements.
The poor countries must in any case have free access to the markets of rich countries, including Denmark, so that they have the best conditions for selling their goods.
SF will dismantle the EU's high tariffs for agricultural products, so that developing countries get a real chance to sell their goods.
Fair trade must continue to be supported and expanded, so that poor farmers and traders have the opportunity to sell their goods at a decent price, and not just on the unfair competition conditions of the so-called free market.
More international cooperation and less war
War is a huge enterprise for many countries, but a catastrophic assault for millions of people.
Therefore, SF will introduce an ethical profiling of the defence's procurement policy, while at the same time we work to ensure that Danish foreign policy becomes less belligerent.
In world politics, the UN must play a larger and more powerful role.
On that stage, the EU must also be stronger.
If the EU is to have a significant presence on the international stage, it requires close cooperation.
SF wants to cooperate on security in Europe and that we must have a discussion about the defense reservation.
Cyber ​​attacks by foreign powers have grown steadily in recent years.
SF wants a threat and security commission that can identify new threats and propose new solutions in the area of ​​defense and security.
We will prioritize cyber defense and disinformation campaigns so that it will be a central element of our defense policy.
Strengthen the Commonwealth and support the path towards independence
Every people who wants political independence in order to create the framework for a national community has a right to it.
SF has therefore supported the steps towards independence that Greenland and the Faroe Islands have taken in recent years, and supports the countries' continued path towards independence.
The road to independence requires the Commonwealth to play a central role.
The Commonwealth gives Denmark, Greenland and the Faroe Islands a common voice on the global stage, where SF will emphasize that Greenland and the Faroe Islands' party, through Denmark's membership, stands clearly with the world community.
It is also important that we prepare the Greenlanders and the Faroes for the economic challenges that complete independence will entail.
As long as the Commonwealth exists, SF will fight to strengthen it.
We want to ensure that we solve our common challenges together.
In Greenland, this applies in particular to the challenges that climate change presents in the arctic areas, while in the Faroe Islands it is necessary to ensure sustainable fishing on the enormous fish banks.
At the same time, the historical links between the countries mean that many Danes, Faroese and Greenlanders live across the Commonwealth's internal borders.
Greenlandic and Faroese independence will not be able to change the fact that for decades family and friendships have been established across the Commonwealth, and that our countries will forever be linked by the common past.
SF has for many years collaborated with the Greenlandic party, Inuit Ataqatigiit, which is both represented in Greenland's Landsting and in the Folketing.
CLIMATE AND ENERGY
We must be at the forefront of the climate fight
Climate change is upon us, and the possible consequences are dire.
Especially if the temperature rises more than 1.5 degrees.
Therefore, we must live up to the Paris Agreement's goal of keeping temperature increases to 1.5 degrees or less.
And there should be no doubt that Denmark must deliver its part of the effort.
It requires a lot of effort, because we still have a high level of climate pollution per inhabitant.
And it has gotten worse here in the last few years under Lars Løkke.
Therefore, we must invest heavily in renewable energy and significantly limit our CO2 emissions.
Coal must be out of the energy supply before 2025, oil in fixed installations before 2030 and natural gas before 2035.
This allows us to reduce our CO2 emissions by 70 per cent. in 2030 compared to 1990.
And we can become CO2 neutral from 2040.
All our electricity must come from renewable energy.
We must have even more wind turbines, on land and in port, and we must have more solar cells and heat pumps.
At the same time, we must invest in energy savings both in businesses, homes and publicly owned buildings.
The biggest emitters of greenhouse gases are the transport sector and agriculture.
We no longer have to drive around in petrol and diesel cars.
Electricity, biogas and other renewable energy must take over.
In 2025, diesel cars must be banned in all major cities and from 2030 you must not be able to buy a new petrol or diesel car in Denmark.
And buses, ferries and public vehicles must run on electricity where possible, just as the majority of the railway must be electrified.
Agriculture accounts for 30 percent of our climate pollution.
Therefore, it is high time that we make greater demands on agriculture: we must, among other things, set aside land with a large climate burden, set consistent requirements for the treatment of manure, require energy efficiency of agricultural machinery and have much more forest.
Action is needed, and Denmark needs to take the lead and show the way instead of just crossing our fingers that other countries or technological development will solve the problem for us.
SF wants a binding climate law.
It must ensure that we live up to the 1.5 degree target in the Paris Agreement.
The Climate Council must be strengthened, and ceilings must be set for the release of greenhouse gases each year.
If Denmark is above the ceiling, new measures must be agreed in connection with the Finance Act to get back on track.
SF has previously presented a number of climate solutions that are now included in our overall climate plan.
CULTURE SPORTS MEDIA
Art and culture for the whole country
The opportunities to experience and cultivate art and culture must reach far wider than today.
Culture must give citizens wings, encourage and inspire throughout their lives – both in Copenhagen and in West Jutland.
Culture can form, develop and create communities across divides.
It must be able to accommodate both the broad and the more niche, and everyone must be able to participate.
We have a special responsibility to involve vulnerable children and young people.
That is why SF is working to introduce a free pass for cultural institutions in the country's municipalities.
Good art and culture cannot live on market conditions in a small country like Denmark.
Therefore, it should not be left only to market forces, personal fortunes and voluntariness. In SF, we want to get rid of the annual savings requirement of 2 percent, which erodes our museums, theaters and cultural institutions year after year.
Diversity and arm's length are two decisive principles for SF.
The distribution of public funds must be kept separate from the legislatures.
At the same time, as legislators, we must have an eye to both support the wildly innovative art and at the same time ensure the breadth of cultural life.
Sports and exercise bind us together
Sport and sports have an important place in Danish society.
It ensures good physical and mental health, creates cohesion and strengthens the integration of ethnic minorities.
Association life is a strong pillar in our local community, where football clubs, gymnastics associations and much more bind us together at crossroad.
We must protect and strengthen that.
At the same time, we must ensure that there is also the opportunity to practice sport outside the associations.
Good sports facilities, cycling and jogging paths make us want to be active and healthy.
SF will prioritize popular sports, but there must also be room for competition and elite sports.
The public sports facilities must therefore be able to cover the needs of both the general public and the elite.
It is important for SF to reduce inequality in health.
In the area of ​​sports, we therefore work for, among other things, healthy food in municipal sports halls,
that social housing measures give vulnerable children and young people the opportunity to play sports in the housing areas,
that leisure passes are issued to the local sports associations,
and that people with special needs are catered for.
Public service must be strengthened in a pressured media landscape
Danish media are under pressure from large international media groups and streaming services, but also from changing consumption patterns, where users obtain information to a far greater extent from social media than from classic media such as radio, TV and newspapers.
It is therefore important that Danish media can still deliver versatile Danish content and ensure democratic debate.
Public Service media such as DR play a special role as providers of impartial, non-commercial and financially independent communication.
DR takes care of a large part of democratic formation and helps to ensure society's cohesion and common understanding.
DR also guarantees that the more niche, the special, the different and the in-depth get a voice.
All that is incredibly important to secure in an otherwise unfair competition against the multinational giants.
SF has fought strongly against the large cuts that the bourgeois parties have subjected DR to. We want a new media settlement.
Denmark must stick together. This requires that a large part of the content the media delivers is produced locally and has a broad impact.
We are prepared to support the large newsrooms in the big cities in order to strengthen the local newsrooms.
SF therefore proposes more funds for local radio stations, that the local newspapers be strengthened and that we preserve the strong news regions on DR and TV 2.
And then there must be requirements for accessibility for citizens who cannot read printed text.
EQUALITY, GENDER AND SEXUALITY
Gender equality
Despite youth rebellion and the outflow of women to the labor market, society is still characterized by gender stereotypes, a gender-divided labor market and large wage differences between men and women.
If it is to change, we must do away with outdated norms and ideas about what men and women can and should do.
That is why SF continues to fight for information about gender, equal pay and earmarking of three months' maternity leave for fathers - to the benefit of both father, mother and children.
We have also ensured that fathers – and fellow mothers – now have the right to 14 weeks of bereavement leave on the same level as the mother in the event of the death of a child.
SF will intensify the fight against trafficking in women, so that victims of human trafficking can get better protection in Denmark.
There must be a general ban on bought sex in Denmark, but there is also a need for holistic efforts that can help women out of prostitution environments.
We have, among other things, helped to secure 63 million for an action plan to combat human trafficking and 10 million for the prevention of gray zone prostitution.
We also want a showdown with outdated female and body ideals, which you encounter in, among other things. the world of advertising: The striving towards unattainable and false ideals creates fertile ground for anxiety, eating disorders and other disorders in young people in particular.
LGBT+
Whether you are gay, bisexual, transgender or something else, you must be able to live out your sexuality and gender identity without risking opposition, oppression and prejudice.
General public information and initiatives in primary schools and at workplaces must help combat prejudices about LGBT+ people.
The many modern and diverse family forms must be recognized, so that co-mothers and co-fathers get far more rights than is the case today.
Also when the right to contact applies if the parents separate.
And then Denmark must work actively to ensure that registered partnerships and marriages between homosexuals are recognized in all EU countries.
SF has helped to remove transgenderism from the list of mental disorders.
Now we work, among other things so that transgender people are ensured proper opportunities for counselling, support and treatment in connection with gender change.
There must be a continued strong focus on supporting young people's opportunities to break with traditional, dogmatic perceptions of sexuality and gender.
Therefore, we have also helped to set aside DKK 25 million to strengthen efforts to increase security, well-being and equal opportunities for particularly vulnerable LGBT+ people, e.g. with an ethnic minority background.
And then gay men must have the right to donate blood on an equal basis with all other men.
NATURE, ENVIRONMENT AND FOOD
More wild nature
The wild nature in Denmark is threatened.
In the last 40 years, we have lost almost 3 million birds, and several species have completely disappeared.
This is due, among other things, to a lack of space, fragmentation of natural areas, buildings and barriers from roads that criss-cross the landscape.
At the same time, ammonia, nitrate and poison from agriculture kill bees and other insects, which are food sources for the birds.
We want to reverse that development.
We want more wild nature and untouched forest, larger contiguous nature areas and more urban nature.
The quality of nature must be boosted.
That is why we have proposed a unified law on nature and biodiversity with fixed goals, time limits and means of action to achieve a greener Denmark.
The municipalities must play a far greater role by getting the finances and muscle to realize the Green Denmark Card, which SF introduced when we were in government.
It must tie the Danish natural gems together and develop new natural areas.
On the whole, nature must be thought of much more together with other policy areas.
A good example is agriculture, where there should be strong incentives to promote nature on agricultural land.
Out with plastic, pesticides and dangerous chemistry
Plastic is a fantastic material that we cannot do without.
But it should not be used as a disposable product in, for example, mugs and carrier bags, because it ends up far too much in nature, where it causes major problems.
In the environment, plastic is broken down again and again into smaller pieces, and microplastics are now found throughout the food chain.
SF has obtained funds from the Finance Act to investigate the extent of plastic pollution, and we have gathered a majority that requires the government to present a draft of a national action plan.
In the EU we have passed a law that will mean 80 billion fewer lightweight carrier bags across the EU when fully implemented.
And we are now pushing to get the Danish government to implement the directive.
Hormone-disrupting substances in our products and environment are potentially ticking bombs for our health and ability to have children.
Far too few parties take it seriously, but SF has succeeded in getting endocrine-disrupting substances on the agenda and securing funds for the research needed to convince other countries and the EU Commission that it is necessary to regulate the dangerous chemistry .
SF works purposefully to remove the large soil contaminations and poison deposits, which - several decades after they arose - still cause problems for the local population and pollute the water environment.
Poison repositories such as Høfde 42 at Harboøre Tange and the extensive pollution from Grindstedværket must be removed as quickly as is technically possible.
SF has therefore proposed a 'green billion', which is a pool that every year must set aside money for cleaning up the large, old poison depots and soil pollution.
Towards a non-toxic agriculture
Danish agriculture must continue to prioritize ecology and good farming, so that we ensure healthy food, proper animal welfare and respect and balance with wild nature.
Organic research and the export of organic food must be strengthened. This will be both an economic and health benefit for Denmark.
But ecology cannot stand alone. Efforts must be made to minimize the pollution and natural stress from traditional agriculture, while the transition to ecology is underway.
Spraying pesticides in agriculture harms both our health and our nature.
We want the legal responsibility for the use of pesticides to be placed with the individual farmer, who must therefore bear the consequences if the discharge of pesticides leads to the development of pesticide resistance on the land.
Even though we have a bourgeois government, we have managed to get an action plan against pesticide resistance.
We are now working to further tighten the use of pesticides.
SF is in favor of a non-toxic agriculture.
"Good farming" is the term for a more sustainable form of agriculture, which requires, among other things, that you examine the soil before blindly spraying it, and that you use machines to weed rather than poison where possible.
As part of a transition to a non-toxic agriculture, SF wants to oblige Danish farmers to comply with the principles of the good farming program.
It will accelerate the conversion to ecology.
More sustainable fishing
The world's population is growing and fish stocks are suffering from overfishing.
It is therefore imperative to ensure sustainable fishing.
Fishing must not be monopolized by a few wealthy quota kings who squeeze the small fishermen.
Aquaculture fish farming creates massive ocean pollution, as it requires large amounts of medicine and chemicals.
In SF, we therefore want the production of fish on land-based facilities with recirculation and purification of the water.
Here, the consumption of medicine is minimal, and the nutrients can be collected and reused in food production.
And then there are jobs in both breeding and technology development.
We support gentle fishing and we want a ban on the use of bottom trawling gear that destroys the seabed and threatens biodiversity in the sea.
Fishing must be sustainable so that we can restore the fish stocks.
It will also have a positive effect on the pollution situation in many waters where the ecological system has been destroyed by pollution.
Animal welfare does not only apply to pets
Animal welfare is a very good argument for promoting organic production.
Unfortunately, many parties are really only interested in animal welfare when it comes to pets and non-agricultural animals.
Agriculture must treat animals properly, we will continue that fight in SF.
And then we are against the production of fur from animals in captivity that cannot live out their natural instincts and behavior.
It has been more than 50 years since it was forbidden to have predators in circuses in Denmark.
Only in 2018 did it succeed in creating a majority to include elephants, sea lions and zebras.
Among other things, thanks to pressure from SF.
ECONOMY, FINANCE AND TAX
Welfare rather than tax breaks
SF fights for good welfare,
a good social safety net
and a more equal Denmark.
Expenditure on welfare must basically follow population development, but more is needed if we are to make it even better – and we must!
There must be balance in the public finances.
Large deficits and growing national debt lead to cutbacks that hit the poorest and most vulnerable.
That is why we do not promise big tax breaks, not even at the bottom.
We want an ambitious policy with fair funding and would like the best-off to contribute a little more.
The increased welfare must be financed, among other things, through:
Wealth tax and higher tax on share income etc. to top taxpayers.
Stop discounting for rich corporate heirs.
A far more effective tax control.
Savings on expensive consultant reports.
A financial sector that benefits everyone
The financial sector has become a hotbed for bandits in suits who are speculating on how to cheat the treasury and the citizens out of as much money as possible.
That needs to change!
We must regulate the financial sector and ensure that it benefits society.
We must be able to trust that the wealth that passes through the sector creates value for society and does not disappear through advice on aggressive tax planning and fraud, high-frequency trading and the sale of complex and opaque financial products.
After the financial crisis, the capital requirements in particular have been tightened, but we are far from the goal.
We must improve regulation for the sake of consumers.
This must be done to minimize the risk of new financial crises and to ensure that the banks take their responsibilities seriously, including in the fight against money laundering, fraud and tax evasion.
SF will tighten controls on capital funds,
campaign against unreasonable contribution increases on mortgage loans,
limit dividend payments and share buybacks,
and break up financial supermarkets.
To fight against tax havens and tax evasion
It must end with the richest and most powerful rich men and companies sending profits to tax shelters and cynically exploiting loopholes in the tax legislation across borders to avoid paying to the community!
Tax evasion and advice to avoid paying tax, whether by multinational corporations, capital funds or banks, helps to undermine our democracy, distort competition and cheat society of money that could have been spent on welfare in the form of of schools, hospitals, elderly care and much more.
In SF, we want a more efficient tax system with better rules on both a Danish and international level.
Right now, the problem is, among other things, that the legislation neither nationally nor internationally has kept up with the development, where money is moved around and channeled into tax havens.
Among other things, it gives large multinational companies all too good opportunities to avoid paying tax to the community.
There must be much better control and actual supervision of capital funds, so that we avoid fraud with dividend tax for astronomical amounts.
And then we want tighter rules for banks and advisers, so that they have a greater responsibility for reporting all questionable tax cheats to the authorities.
RELIGION AND FAITH
The right to believe – or not to believe
SF wants a society that, on the one hand, accepts and respects religious diversity
and on the other hand, a state where religion is never above democratic decisions and rights.
And where the inviolability of the individual citizen stands above religious considerations and ideas, which may have to be expressed and practiced by different faith communities.
We live in a diverse society where some are religious while others are not at all.
Therefore, SF wants all recognized religious communities to be treated on an equal footing with the National Church in terms of rights and duties, so that the same demands are made on everyone.
A number of administrative functions should be handled by the municipalities rather than by the church, including name changes, birth certificates, etc.
It does not make sense that in a society with many religions, and where many citizens are not religious, you have to go to church for this sort of thing.
SF was at the forefront of the fight for the introduction of registered partnerships in 1989 for homosexuals –
and the same was the case when the Norwegian Parliament passed the new law in 2012, which gives homosexuals the right to get married in the traditional way.
Many young people's lives – not least in strongly religious environments – are often limited by social control and outdated notions of honor and gender roles.
In order to regulate this, SF has helped to clarify the requirements to be approved as a marriage authority, so that the officiants have knowledge of Danish family law and freedom traditions and also helped to legislate the requirement for decorum for officiants, so that they e.g. must not participate in marriages with minors or forced marriages.
LEGAL POLICY, DATA AND SECURITY
Punishment and prevention
In recent years, Denmark has undergone a worrying tendency to solve all problems with crime by introducing stricter punishments.
SF is not opposed to stricter penalties in principle, but believes in a balanced legal policy in which prevention plays an important role.
Precisely prevention has been systematically failed under bourgeois governments, which do not recognize that the fight against inequality, strengthened legal certainty and a strong social effort are fundamental in the fight for a safe society.
This is exactly what separates Denmark from countries that have a one-sided focus on stricter punishments, but which at the same time have more crime.
If Denmark is to remain one of the safest societies in the world, it requires that we do not fail our tradition to focus on prevention, resocialization and respect for international conventions.
But also that we work hard against gangs and foreign criminals to show that the Danish community does not accept antisocial behaviour.
Early and targeted action must be taken so that fewer people end up on a criminal career path.
Exit programs and exit models must help ensure that ex-offenders have strong alternatives to staying in a criminal career.
We are against punishing children and young people under the criminal minimum age - children must be helped, not let down.
Police and security
Unfortunately, the Danish police have been used for the symbolic politics of changing governments, instead of the real police work that should make the citizens safe.
It can be seen in many ways.
The police are instructed by ministers to waste time with raids on Christiania and border patrols, while more and more employees spend their time filling out control forms and less and less on police work.
The police's own trade magazine reported in 2017 that out of the approximately 10,000 employees in the police, there were up to 2,500 for preparedness and investigation.
When civil politicians talk about a lack of resources in the police, it sounds hollow all the while that their own decisions keep the police from creating security and putting the masterminds behind bars.
SF believes that the police must once again prioritize traditional police work in close proximity to citizens, where local contact and local knowledge are prioritized.
Data and monitoring
Technology is not bad or good, it is a tool.
But the right to privacy should be a human right.
Therefore, SF works to ensure that technology becomes our servant, not our master.
Data discipline is needed rather than data greed: Companies should not just be able to sell information about our health and our habits on the Internet, and the state should not mass monitor citizens without cause.
We must therefore both regulate the internet giants and hold hands with the powers of public authorities.
SF works i.a. for us to have a Data Ethics Council, as we currently have an Ethics Council in the health sector,
and a register supervision that can act as a watchdog for misuse of register data – because the problem only really arises when large amounts of data are systematically collated.
We also want to ensure proper administrative practices, where public authorities do not collect more data about citizens than necessary, and where the citizen's right to privacy comes before the system.
SCHOOL, EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
Let's set the school free
Folkeskolen must both form and educate, while ensuring that all children thrive.
And so it is in school that the children's democratic foundation must be secured and developed.
One of the primary school's most important qualities is that it can give all students the best opportunities to learn, regardless of the family's social, economic and educational background.
We must both ensure and strengthen that.
At the same time, we must set the primary school free so that teaching is not dictated by national tests and learning objectives.
Academic hours must be supplemented and imbued with physical and interdisciplinary activity and creative elements.
SF wants the class size down to a maximum of 24 pupils, and then we should look at the length of the school day, which has become far too long for many pupils after the primary school reform in 2014.
Relax - drop the savings
Far too many young people experience a stressful everyday life.
They are not only naturally busy, but find it difficult to cope with the increasing expectations from themselves or others for a perfect performance every time.
There is a need to give the young people more peace of mind.
We want to put a damper on the culture of competition and give more time for creativity, immersion and to fail.
The school day should make students smarter and more capable, not just prepare them for the next test or exam.
Therefore, SF will have grade-free classes and remove the bonus you get if you apply quickly for higher education.
Young people must have time to develop.
They must have the opportunity to both choose and choose whether,
and there must also be room for a sabbatical year or two after high school and before the education, if that is what is needed.
It is not grades and exams that create talented students.
These are good courses and teachers with time for the individual student.
That is why we must also stop the savings on education.
Turn off the green harvester and invest in education
SF will stop savings on the educations.
The reprioritization contribution to education forces new savings through each year.
It is time to switch off the green harvester and invest in the academic and study environment quality of higher education.
There must be time for reflection and professional sparring, and the number of teaching hours must be increased for a number of courses.
This applies, among other things, to the humanities and social sciences. In the medium-term programmes, it is important that the internship courses are strengthened.
The Danish universities must be independent, both in the way they organize the academic content of the programs and in the concrete research projects.
But cooperation must be strengthened with the other parts of society, including companies, the state, municipalities, regions and organisations.
It must strengthen the academic content of the universities and at the same time facilitate the transition of graduates to the labor market.
Denmark must both now and in the future live on knowledge and skills.
It requires that we invest in education instead of cutting back.
More skilled workers require good education
In the near future, Denmark will lack skilled workers.
At the same time, more and more unskilled jobs are disappearing due to technological development.
But despite a broad political ambition for more people to take vocational training, savings are being forced through on vocational training.
It doesn't make sense.
That trend must be reversed.
SF has long fought to abolish the so-called re-prioritisation contribution at the vocational schools and the AMU schools.
And then we propose to make the pupils in the primary school more curious about vocational education by, for example, introducing a practical project assignment and practical music subjects.
If we are to have more skilled workers, it also requires more internships.
Therefore, SF believes that all public authorities must use work and training clauses when tendering, so that they ensure that the companies that must carry out the work bear part of the social responsibility by taking on apprentices.
HEALTH
Equal access to a healthy life
Our healthcare must be for everyone.
A crucial focus for SF is to eliminate inequality in health.
There must be free and equal access to the highest quality healthcare – regardless of income and education.
There must be an end to strengthening private services at the expense of the public health service.
There is a great shortage of general practitioners, especially in outlying areas and vulnerable residential areas.
Therefore, we will relieve the general practitioners from a number of tasks.
This can be done by ensuring better health care, local health centres, social nurses, psychological help for young people and permanent doctors attached to nursing homes.
And then the regions must no longer be forced to outsource medical services to expensive private players such as Falck and Care.
Elderly and medical patients must be ensured proper investigation and diagnosis immediately upon admission.
SF therefore also works to ensure that diagnostic centers are built in several hospitals with fast and efficient investigation and treatment processes.
Consistency must be ensured in treatment, rehabilitation and rehabilitation through municipal process coordinators.
Citizens with chronic diseases such as diabetes, osteoporosis, dementia, Parkinson's and sclerosis must be offered patient education together with relatives, so that they can better understand and manage their diseases.
Health begins with prevention
All historical experience shows that the most important prevention measures and the path to less inequality in health are good living conditions for all citizens.
Our lifestyle also plays a big role.
Therefore, we should drink and smoke less, while we move more and eat healthier.
Employee groups with hard physical work should, for example, have a voluntary offer of exercise during working hours.
Dental health must be improved for everyone.
This must initially be done by offering free dental treatment to young people between the ages of 18 and 25, vulnerable and older citizens with low incomes.
We believe that we can make a big difference to health by preventing far more.
More health care visits for young children, more health care for vulnerable families, early and outreach efforts towards vulnerable citizens in particularly burdened residential areas and midwifery visits at workplaces.
Folkeskolen must be supported in meeting the Danish Health Authority's recommendations for 60 minutes of physical activity for children and young people every day.
Children should always be offered a healthy meal in day care centers and schools.
And then children and young people must have better access to association sports with the help of free passes for families with low incomes.
Psychiatry with care
We must have a psychiatry where all citizens have the right to be declared healthy.
Where you are taken care of along the way with a plan to step down and step off psychotropic drugs completely.
There must be more focus on prevention.
Patients and relatives must be involved much more in the treatment, and we must continue to reduce the use of coercion, both in terms of belt fixations and forced medication.
And then there is a need for more places in psychiatry.
We want a ban on giving children and young people medicine that is not separately approved for the age group, and then in the future there must be a greater focus on expanding the treatment palette in psychiatry, so that all citizens have the opportunity to receive drug-free treatment throughout the country .
Stress, anxiety and depression are eating away at public health these years, and therefore SF will continue the fight to ensure that young people can get free psychological help and that even more citizens can receive subsidies for psychological treatment.
A way out of the abuse
Behind an adult with an addiction often hides one or more children who need special support.
All municipalities and regions must therefore offer addicts and their families access to 24-hour treatment for alcohol and drug addiction.
Society must always be ready to seize people who have become unbalanced.
Citizens who struggle with both an addiction problem and a psychiatric diagnosis often fall between two chairs.
The substance abuse services reject them if they are psychotic, and the psychiatric departments reject them if they are drug addicts.
In 2017, in a joint agreement with municipalities, regions and a broad majority in the Danish Parliament, 150 places were created for particularly vulnerable citizens with dual diagnoses.
Unfortunately, it is only a small step on the way.
There is a need for more offers that embrace social and psychiatric care.
No thanks to toxic toys
As consumers, we must be able to safely use all kinds of products sold in stores, without fear of serious health risks such as cancer, allergies or hormone-disrupting effects.
If there is reason to suspect that a substance has a serious harmful effect, it must be banned.
This is happening at EU level, and Denmark must therefore play a very active role here.
But Denmark must also be able to take the lead if the EU is unable to act.
And unfortunately, it is going far too slowly, because the EU only looks at each individual substance separately - out of the many thousands of potentially dangerous substances.
It must be clear that there are less harmful alternatives to the dangerous substances and products. Therefore, we will promote environmental labeling and public green procurement policy, also when it comes to opting out of dangerous substances.
As soon as there are alternatives on the market, we must push for a complete ban on the dangerous substances.
Denmark has strong research environments within endocrine-disrupting substances.
Research must be strengthened and have security for grants over many years, so that they can plan for the future and not be threatened by closure.
TRANSPORTATION
Better and cheaper public transport
Public transport is essential for us to make a difference to the environment and at the same time deal with the problems of congestion on the roads.
SF works for better, faster and more punctual trains and buses, the vast majority of which must be electric.
The time model must ensure consistency across the country and travel times of 1 hour by train between each of the major cities: Copenhagen, Odense, Aarhus, Aalborg, Esbjerg and Herning.
Other cities must have good and fast connections to the main roads.
And then investment must be made in more efficient and environmentally friendly light rail, for example between Gladsaxe and Nørrebro Station in Copenhagen and several stages in Aarhus, among others.
Replace fossil cars with green electric cars
A significant reorganization of the car park is needed.
The biggest problem is diesel and petrol cars, which are major climate culprits.
Electric cars must be significantly cheaper, and this must help to ensure that in 2030 we can stop the sale of petrol and diesel cars.
If it is to succeed, the taxes on electric cars must be reduced immediately.
It is absolutely necessary if we are to phase out petrol and diesel cars.
SF proposes to scrap the government's absurd tax breaks on fossil-fuel cars and use the money to introduce a tax break on electric cars immediately.
SF wants a significant green reorganization of the taxation on passenger cars, so that petrol and diesel cars, apart from the very most energy efficient ones, will be around DKK 25,000 more expensive, and electric cars will be cheaper.
SF proposes a subsidy of DKK 50,000 for the purchase of an electric car.
At the same time, it is urgent to do away with both congestion and pollution in the big cities.
The large cities must be diesel-free by 2025 at the latest, and the city municipalities must immediately have the freedom to introduce stricter environmental zones.
In addition, we must ensure that all cars owned or used by the public sector become electric.
Passenger cars must be converted to electricity in 2019-2023, while heavy vehicles must be replaced as new contracts are entered into.
Fewer cars and less pollution
For years, there have been more and more cars on the roads.
More congestion and more pollution.
We need to slow the growth of motoring.
SF therefore proposes to introduce road pricing, which is adjusted according to how much congestion there is.
The tax will be zero or close to zero for passenger cars on rural roads where there is not much traffic, but high in cities and on busy roads.
Fares must be highest during rush hour.
Road pricing will ensure less congestion on the roads and benefit the climate,
but it must also help to close the hole in the state coffers, which is expected to occur when many more electric cars with lower taxes come on the roads.
The technological development means that it is possible to get a chip into every single car, which means that you can introduce road pricing without major daily inconvenience, which takes into account where the car drives and the congestion on the roads, but also the car's fuel type and efficiency.
It will therefore not be necessary to have countless payment systems in order to introduce a system that can be efficient and user-friendly.
More bicycles for better health and a cleaner environment
SF works to promote cycling everywhere in Denmark.
When we leave the car and take the bike, it is both healthy and pollution-free.
Therefore, it must of course also be supported politically.
SF wants government funding to be set aside for cycling projects throughout the country.
This could be, for example, super cycle paths or cycle cities, as Odense has been successful with, for example.
FOREIGNERS AND INTEGRATION
A humane refugee policy
In SF, we are concerned about the current tendency to pursue symbolic politics in the area of ​​refugees, as we saw, for example, with the Jewelery Act.
Humanism and international solidarity are threatened when a majority in the Danish Parliament refuses to accept quota refugees.
At the same time, we see nothing humanistic in the current asylum system.
It caters to the strongest refugees who risk drowning in the Mediterranean, while the world's weakest are left in refugee camps under inhumane conditions.
It is deeply unsustainable.
SF therefore wants a reform of the entire refugee system, so that we can create a humanistic and solidary alternative based on the UN's quota system instead of spontaneous asylum.
Denmark must live up to the UN's wishes regarding the number of quota refugees that the EU and Denmark must rehouse in order to ease the refugee burden sufficiently and in solidarity.
In return, we want a fair queuing system, so that the weakest refugees do not end up at the back of the queue, as is happening now.
Everyone must be treated properly in Denmark.
This applies to the highest degree to children, who must not be exposed to deplorable conditions in asylum centres, and then the child's best interests must weigh heavily in the proceedings.
Space for everyone who wants to
In SF, we do not distinguish between people on the basis of their faith or skin color.
But we demand that everyone participate actively in society and contribute to the democratic and peaceful development of Denmark.
It is unfortunately a fact that there are problems with integration in Denmark.
Everyone has a shared responsibility for making the integration a success - both those who come here and those who have always lived here.
Integration is a joint task.
We will abolish the cash assistance ceiling and the integration benefit, which help to increase inequality in society and hinder integration.
Socio-economic companies must have better conditions, and access to Danish education and other basic skills must be simpler and mandatory.
We oppose the social control that permeates some patriarchal cultures and oppresses women.
Women with other ethnic backgrounds must have the professional and social help they need, and the country's women's centers must have a better legal and financial framework.
And then the special challenges and interests of these women must be strengthened through a newly established knowledge centre.
INEQUALITY AND POVERTY
No one should live in poverty
The cash aid cap must go.
It is the first item on SF's to-do list after an election.
The cash aid ceiling made more than 10,000 children poor in a few months after it was introduced by the Løkke government.
That number is expected to have grown to around 25,000 since.
In other words, the consequences of cynical bourgeois politics are enormous.
Inequality is increasing and more and more children are affected.
In the worst case, it leads to poverty, social exclusion and homelessness.
We must not accept that.
Not in our welfare Denmark.
We must take care of those who have the least.
We must have recreated social responsibility.
Poverty does not disappear when the bourgeois parties remove the poverty line.
It does not help to turn a blind eye to the problems.
The poverty line needs to be reinstated so that we can clearly see and track down the people who need help.
Better help for the vulnerable
In SF, we work for a society where everyone is involved.
Therefore, we must also ensure that vulnerable citizens get the help they need.
With the right effort, it is possible to strengthen the citizens' own resources and options so that they can have a dignified life.
Maybe even an education and a job.
In SF, we cannot accept that vulnerable population groups or people are parked outside the community. Efforts must be made early, be preventive and solved by looking at the whole person, the family and the surrounding environment.
Vulnerable citizens often have 10-20 case handlers.
It must be changed so that the citizen basically only has one single contact person who can draw on the necessary experts in, for example, health, social care, employment and education.
SF's 15 negotiation requirements
SF is a red-green party that wants to change Denmark and create hope for future generations.
We must not simply roll back legislation, because everything was not just better yesterday and the status quo is not good enough.
We can create a better future if we want to.
That is why SF is going to the polls to get a new red-green government that can create hope and progress for everyone.
By progress, we mean that Denmark must once again be a leading green country.
That we make Denmark a country where everyone has the opportunity to pursue their dreams, regardless of their background.
That we develop welfare
and combats rising inequality.
That we give each other more peace of mind, and get rid of the stress society.
That we take responsibility for the weakest in Denmark and the world.
And that we take responsibility for strengthening democracy,
Denmark's commitment to the EU
and the international struggle for human rights.
If the majority changes to a red bloc, we point to the Social Democratic Party's chairman Mette Frederiksen as the new prime minister, because she will have the best opportunity to gather a new red-green majority behind her.
At the same time, we will make a number of negotiating demands for the new government's policy.
Fulfillment of the requirements will be decisive for whether SF will consider becoming part of the new government, or whether we must be a supporting party and fight to promote our policy on a case-by-case basis.
SF will never equip any government with carte blanche.
Our support depends at any given time on the policy pursued in the specific situation and the consequences of new elections.
SF's negotiation requirements
We will fight the growing inequality
We will remove the cap on cash benefits and raise taxes for the richest
We want to ensure that more people can retire before they are worn out
We will begin the abolition of user fees for health care, i.a. psychological help and dentist
We want to give the Danes more peace of mind
We want to make a calm reform that will ensure time for the important things in life and stop the stress epidemic
We will give children more peace of mind and introduce minimum norms of a maximum of 3 children per day. adult in nurseries and a maximum of 6 children per adult in kindergartens
We want a showdown with tests, grade races and the performance culture in the education system
We want to make Denmark a leading green country
We will introduce a binding climate act that reduces CO2 emissions by 60 per cent. before 2030
We will set aside a green billion every year for, among other things, to clean up toxic grounds, ensure more wild nature and spread ecology
We will protect our clean drinking water through stricter regulation
We want to strengthen Denmark's international efforts
We want Denmark to receive quota refugees again
We want to increase Danish development aid
We want Denmark to work for a new humane, solidary and efficient European asylum system
We want to strengthen democracy
We want a publicity law that strengthens a free and critical press
We want the public sector to give employees more freedom to carry out their work and citizens greater local influence and self-management
We want to make it easier on the private labor market for employees to buy, start and run businesses
SF's final position will depend on the strength we gain at the general election, what parliamentary opportunities are there to promote our policy,
as well as the concessions the Social Democrats will make in order to count SF's mandates as permanent supporters.
It is up to SF's national leadership to decide whether SF will go into government or be a supporting party after an election.
