Preface
In 2010, Jobbik wrote its program under the title Radical Change.
If we take this document in our hands today, in 2014, we can see that we were right in everything.
We can read that Jobbik was the only party that, even then, raised the real problems openly and with needlepoint precision.
We can face the fact that we are the only ones who had meaningful and correct answers to these crucial questions - neither stated nor smeared by Fidesz and the MSZP.
We can also realize that in the years that have passed since then, both parties have taken a lot out of our plans,
but unfortunately, in the absence of adequate values ​​and mentality, they could only spoil them.
In the end, it also became clear that what we said then and there, both in terms of the diagnosis and the solution, is still valid and guiding today, along with certain updates.
I would add: unfortunately.
Jobbik's radical change program is unfortunately still relevant today,
which means nothing else than that after eight years of the socialists' destruction of the country, Fidesz could not even find a way out with two thirds,
in fact, it only aggravated the problems in many areas.
With this current election program, we therefore want to offer an electable, strong and governable alternative to those who are fed up with the governance of both Fidesz and MSZP,
who feel that the last 24 years have been a mistake, who feel that they have been repeatedly cheated, humiliated and stolen from.
Because let's say it clearly: even with some minor positive measures, the governments of both parties stole, cheated, and lied.
Of course, one or the other tries to explain the situation, to make it up, but we have no other choice than to believe our own eyes, ears and mind.
All you have to do is look around the country.
To see our factories disappear
businesses and workplaces have ceased to exist;
the settlements collapsed,
our formerly flourishing agriculture and backyard production were absorbed;
half a million Hungarians emigrated.
Hearing people complain about security
for healthcare,
for education,
for administration, for everything.
Finally, to understand that the whole thing is not the fault and sin of the people, but only and exclusively of the political leadership.
Society's only responsibility is that it was too gullible and too permissive.
This was abused by politics.
this must end.
That's enough!
We don't just want to replace the last four years,
but the past twenty-four.
From everything.
We also want to free our country from the Fidesz and MSZP governments, because despite their apparent opposites, they are each other's conditions.
As long as there is one, there is also the other.
If the country has had enough of one of them, if it wants real change, it must get rid of both.
We, the people of the right, therefore want to open a new chapter for Hungary and the Hungarian people.
We want to finally start a better future.
Society voted the socialists twelve years of confidence,
eight for Fidesz.
We see that they abused the trust,
how they became unfit to run the country.
It's time for someone else to get a chance.
The time has come for people to finally choose Jobbik, not the lesser evil.
In 2010, we promised a radical change, but unfortunately we were not authorized to implement it.
Now we are here again and we are asking the Hungarian people for an opportunity.
An opportunity to prove: there is a solution.
And this solution is our program, which provides economic recovery,
quality jobs,
order and security,
and firm accountability
and offers real system change.
Let's put an end to deafness, gossip, lying, fraud, theft and treason!
Let's end the last 24 years!
We dare to say the existing problems,
and we dare to say the real solutions.
This is the first step, until the other parties get there.
They fear the truth
and programs based on lies, self-deception and fraud are all shattered by reality,
as we have seen in the last 24 years.
However, Jobbik is not only brave enough to state the national rescue program, but also to implement it.
We don't just want to talk about our program, we want to implement it.
We are not enough for this, the second step, on our own.
This requires your support.
Please read this program carefully and if you like it, give us a chance.
We ask for one vote, and with it a four-year opportunity,
and we will prove to everyone: we can lead this country better and more honestly.
Gábor Vona is Jobbik's prime ministerial candidate
1. The Seven Leaders plan
Many of us are already waiting for the Hungarian economy to finally start,
and especially that this should improve the working conditions and living standards of the Hungarian people,
not just the indicators of multinational capital.
Regardless of party affiliation, everyone was obviously interested in this.
On the other hand, opinions are widely divided regarding the road leading there.
If we grasp the essence of the differences between opinions, it also draws out the true fault line of Hungarian domestic politics.
What we mean by this is that there are not actually three types of scenarios for getting the economy back on its feet: Fidesz, Socialist and Jobbik,
but only two: the one characterized by the parties of the last twenty-four years and the one of the better ones.
The idea of ​​the first group, which equally includes Fidesz and MSZP, can be called colonial,
while Jobbike was assigned to the anti-colonial scenario.
The essence of a colonial scenario is that it is accepted economically by our country and nation
- and consequently politically and culturally - his subordinated position.
The range of acceptance can take on countless shades within the spectrum from sad resignation to enthusiastic support, but the essence remains the same: you accept Hungary's servile, subjugated status.
He accepts that Hungary is the backyard of the Union, where the servants and draft animals live,
whose job it is to provide cheap labor,
so that he could use his little money to buy the expensive, often poor quality products of foreigners
- which, due to the reverse of the situation, is often produced by us -,
and to tolerate the landfill environment.
He also accepts that the slaves living here cannot have well-functioning, competitive businesses, assets suitable for self-maintenance, own land, loan-free real estate, etc.
Obviously, the question then arises, what are the essential issues that neither Fidesz, nor the MSZP, nor the other parties discuss?
These are actually the crucial and essential questions from the point of view of starting the economy.
Jobbik outlined the Seven Leaders plan, which are seven big job-creating ideas from the restart of the food industry through the strengthening of the construction industry to the construction of the Danube-Tisza canal.
However, it must be admitted that all this is only a half-solution, even if we get into government, until we can achieve a decisive turn in three major issues.
So what are these three essential areas?
What are the top three obstacles?
1. Hungary's EU vulnerability.
Until we manage to put our relationship with the Union on a new foundation,
as long as we live in the world of "European prices, third world wages",
until we can't even protect it
nor to support Hungarian industry,
until we have a nationally owned farm, our country will stagnate.
There are two acceptable options: either renegotiation of our EU relationship,
or leaving the Union
and the early implementation of a Central European cooperation alternative.
2. Hungary's indebtedness
As long as the Hungarian state, Hungarian enterprises, and Hungarian families are in an unshakeable spiral of debt, it is impossible to ensure lasting economic growth.
There is only one option here: renegotiate the debt.
In the case of the state, this can be a partial remission of the debt, a reduction of its interest burden or a rescheduling,
and in the case of the private sector, the conclusion of fair credit agreements instead of the current, immoral and illegal credit agreements that only serve the interests of the banks.
3. Endangerment of Hungarian land ownership and water resources.
As long as our fundamental national treasures – our land and water – are threatened by Hungarian ownership, we must concentrate on protecting them with all our might.
Here, the solution is also clear, even at the cost of international and EU disagreement and conflict: the land and water remain Hungarian property,
and we will provide constitutional protection for this.
When Jobbik came to power, overcoming these three major obstacles,
he will consider the implementation of the Seven Leaders plan, that is, the creation of Hungarian jobs that provide a decent living, as his most important task.
Creating workplaces that have a multiple impact, generate more and more businesses and investments, thus our money circulates at home and enriches us.
Once in government, we want to be the government of job creation.
And we will be.
The guiding thread of Jobbik's election program is therefore work.
Let's face it: if there is work, then everything is there.
If there is no work, then there is nothing.
If people have a decent living, then they can pay their bills, the costs of raising their children, they are able to shop, and they also have access to entertainment, education, and travel.
At the same time, they are much less likely to get into debt,
or that they burden the social network of the state.
It also speaks in favor of strengthening job creation that one of the basic conditions for economic growth is internal consumption.
This can increase if people have purchasing power,
this, however, requires jobs that provide a decent living.
Finally, the most humane way to increase state tax revenues is to have more jobs,
thus, public burden-bearing rests on a broader basis than at present.
Therefore, our basic goal is to restore the dignity of work in Hungary,
for which, on the one hand, the number of jobs must be increased,
on the other hand, their livelihood quality must also be strengthened.
European wages are paid for European-level work.
We can state that, in contrast, there are few jobs in the country today,
and these usually provide a fraction of the purchasing power of Western European wages as income for the robotic, vulnerable Hungarian workers.
While prices and work expectations are European, wages and working conditions are reminiscent of the Third World.
Those who can flee from suffocating unemployment abroad;
and those who enjoy the "privilege" of having a job can constantly fear losing it,
he may resent his low wages and unworthy working conditions.
The current government promised job creation,
but he also failed in this promise.
With the help of statistical tricks - just like during the MSZP governments - the party media shouts that the situation has never been so good.
However, people's everyday and own experience is different.
Despite the multibillion-dollar media campaign and the self-proclaimed billboards, society feels firsthand that it is all fake.
Public work is an important institution, but it is not a real workplace, but a social policy measure.
Including this in the statistics is, to put it mildly, a blatant lie.
Even more outrageous is the inclusion of those who take up work abroad in the government's employment policy data series.
We also consider it insufficient to build the country's future on job creation by multinational companies that are abundantly provided with tax incentives and subsidies.
Hungary's future cannot be built on public service and slave labor.
According to Jobbik, for the Hungarian people, based on Hungarian characteristics, producing Hungarian value,
Jobs that strengthen Hungary's national economy must be created.
All this is not impossible, but for this the government must concentrate on this task with all its strength.
If Jobbik comes to power, it will be the government of job creation.
For this purpose, the Seven Leaders plan was created within Jobbik's election program.
A plan through which I want to regain our own country.
The new Hungarian national conquest through job creation is based on seven pillars, each part of which is a comprehensive employment project.
A program within a program.
This also means that we consider creating the possibility of a living to be our first task.
This is the most important part of our election program, because as we said: if there is work, then there is everything.
1.1. Food industry self-determination and export capability development plan
1.1.1 Slave fate
The structure of Hungarian agriculture was significantly transformed and degraded after the change of regime, the "reorganization" of producer cooperatives (teasers)
and as a result of the redistribution of land ownership.
The processes that took place largely transferred cooperative and state ownership to former party secretaries and chairmen, as well as to foreign speculators flocking to Hungarian farmland.
The successive governments with their neoliberal economic policies forcing privatization and liberalization (e.g. acceptance of unfair production subsidies and quotas simultaneously with the reduction of protective tariffs as a result of compliance with EU requirements at all costs)
and by giving up the eastern markets they contributed to the destruction of economic production,
which most sensitively affected Hungarian agriculture, which can be considered a strategic sector.
The greatness of the loss is well illustrated by the fact that in 1990, Hungarian agriculture provided the livelihood of 693,000 people,
on the other hand, today it offers a living for less than two hundred thousand people.
Hungary has lost half a million jobs in agriculture alone since the regime change.
The XXI. One of the most important questions of the 21st century will be who will cultivate the shrinking land areas as a result of desertification due to global climate change,
and thus who can feed the growing population of our planet with healthy and safe food.
Hungary has all the resources to ensure not only self-sufficiency, but also exports: land, water and expertise.
In the past 24 years, the majority of the food industry has been in the hands of foreign owners;
in the last 10 years, the production value of the food processing industry has decreased by about 30%.
Foreign capital gradually liquidated or moved Hungarian food processing factories to other countries,
due to lack of capital and state aid, a Hungarian ownership group could not replace it.
The food processing sector is still characterized by a poor capital situation and low profitability.
In addition, the distribution of foodstuffs is mainly carried out by highly concentrated, mostly multinational retail store chains,
as a result, the majority of the profit accrues to them instead of domestic producers.
Currently, Hungarian agriculture primarily produces raw materials, most of which it exports,
then we import a part of the processed products for our own consumption.
This is therefore a colonial economy, since a country that exports raw materials and imports finished products can be considered a colony in an economic sense.
This is the road to political colonization.
The decline in the role of agriculture in rural employment (monoculture, decreasing use of live labour, closed factories),
as well as the ever-increasing rise of the service sector, similar to international trends, is also a general phenomenon in Hungary.
Despite this, agriculture is still one of the sources of livelihood in the countryside, although it is unfortunately dwindling.
The efficiency of labor utilization differs significantly in farms based on part-time and family labor and those employing "foreign" labor (these can also be cooperatives), with a three-fold difference in efficiency in favor of the latter.
However, in the structure of our agricultural production, both types of production (both family farms and farms based on employed labor) have their place and role.
1.1.2 All in one
Unlike the previous practice, rural development programs must be implemented with a holistic approach.
The previous governments created institutions that did not or barely communicated with each other by "delegating" tasks,
which hindered the coordinated development of the closely related and often largely overlapping fields and the utilization of the available resources.
The countryside is based on agriculture,
to which food production linked to agriculture is closely related,
the craft industry,
waste management and recycling,
water management
and coordination of renewable energy production.
The ultimate goal is to set up a sustainable system that always adapts to and is based on local circumstances, ensuring maximum (in some cases full) employment.
Food and fodder crops must be grown on valuable agricultural land,
good pastures should be used for animal breeding,
but there are areas of land that cannot be used for anything other than the cultivation of bioenergy plants.
Biogas can be produced by fermenting properly treated sewage sludge, compostable organic waste and animal manure,
while the remaining sediment can be transformed into high-value earthworm humus using manure worms.
Most of the waste generated as a result of correctly and regularly applied life cycle analysis (LCA), the development of the appropriate product structure, the correct product choice (environmentally conscious shopping) and advanced waste sorting systems can be reused,
while the combustible waste fraction can be converted into heat and electrical energy in one system even together with the produced biomass (e.g. wood chips and briquettes) with appropriate combustion and flue gas purification technology.
The combined utilization of other renewable energy sources – geothermal (primarily heat pump), water energy, wind energy, solar energy – results in the energy self-sufficiency of rural settlements.
1.1.3 The real struggle for economic freedom
The key to maintaining the population of villages and creating an attractive region for young people is employment,
social and economic cohesion,
public safety,
in short, the security of the population of the countryside and a suitable living environment for all age groups.
If the future Jobbik government's market protection (ensuring food self-determination)
and market acquisition (spectacular increase in export opportunities in the East) also achieves its goals,
the number of rural food industry jobs can start to grow enormously,
and we can once again create the half a million jobs lost in agriculture since the regime change.
It should be noted here that for the Hungarian food industry, due to long-term sustainability, the planning requires the fullest possible supply of the domestic market – both geographically and in terms of product range.
while for export goods, the production of high-quality products with high added value must be achieved.
For the Hungarian food industry, a double goal must therefore be set and realized.
The fullest possible implementation of domestic food self-determination
and finding an export market that can be served by restarting our production capacities.
At the common root of this dual goal is, of course, a fundamental goal: getting Hungarian people to decent work
and thereby kick-starting the country's economy,
saving the countryside.
For this, the reorganization of our relations with the Union and the multinational capital here (Hungarian land ownership, plant regulation, market protection, self-determination, quotas, etc.) is essential,
which promises to be a huge struggle, therefore concentrated governmental and social cooperation is essential.
However, this battle must be fought, it will be the real struggle for economic freedom, which will decide whether Hungary remains a colony, with colonial political leadership,
or it will be a free country with a national government.
By restoring the food industry producing for the domestic and export markets, Jobbik undertakes to reopen and rebuild our closed factories,
we save those who are currently dying,
in addition, we are introducing new ones into the national economy.
We eliminate the dumping of foreign goods,
and we put 80% Hungarian products on the Hungarian shelves,
we will break the monopoly of multinational shopping centers and their practice of degrading our national economy,
through the upswing of agriculture and the finished product-oriented food industry, we also breathe life into the manufacturing industry, machine manufacturing and other sectors that are based on it,
with this, we will create at least one hundred thousand decent living jobs already in the first cycle.
In addition, we will provide priority state support for research and development in the sector,
to not only catch up with the world's leading edge in innovation in the agricultural, water management, and food industry sectors, but to become pioneers in it.
Quality food must also be clean, healthy, modern and popular food,
and for this, continuous developments and new technologies are essential.
We do the right thing if we do not import this knowledge, but create it ourselves with the involvement of already existing but neglected specialists and expertise.
One third of the expansion of employment in agriculture and the agricultural processing industry can be created on a market basis,
which from the creation of new jobs,
on the other hand, from more even utilization of the current workforce,
or it may come from the bleaching of black labor,
another third or half can be social-based,
while the remaining part may appear indirectly in our rural areas as multiple effects in other sectors.
Diversification based on the wide use of the raw material base, outside of the basic agricultural activity, in addition to additional income
can significantly increase the labor consumption of farms.
Food processing on farms and finished product-oriented production can play an important role in expanding employment.
since increasing processing creates added value and jobs at the same time.
The increase in direct product sales also offers employment expansion opportunities,
in addition, the expansion of renewable energy production mentioned above may result in the creation of a few thousand to tens of thousands of market-based jobs in the sector, depending on the types of renewable energy.
The transition to ecological (bio) production, which requires a lot of labor
and connecting it with bioenergy production is possible, the ideal conditions for this are given in Hungary.
We don't need tasteless Dutch tomatoes, Spanish melons, Irish beef and Danish pork.
We can all produce this
and mostly in better quality.
An important means of job creation is the expansion of the product structure,
the realization of the finished product-oriented economy.
The processing of all raw materials produced in the various production sectors of agriculture and forestry into complete finished products
and the development of related services,
furthermore, the reuse of waste generated during production processes and the use of products can create many jobs.
The above examples can be joined by the wide range of raw materials and products of the forestry industry (wood chips, briquettes, building wood, furniture industry, paper industry, ornaments, utility items, barrels, carts, etc.), the local or regional use of which can create additional employment opportunities.
The service industry related to agriculture, village tourism/agritourism, wine tourism, public catering, and the creation of local business chains all offer additional employment opportunities.
Cooperatives established in self-sustaining micro-regions can promote finished product-based farming by being able to economically realize the production of certain finished products that are not profitable for individual farmers with the involvement of several producers.
Among the cooperative forms, social cooperatives occupy a special place, which were organized with the aim of creating working conditions for their disadvantaged members, as well as promoting the improvement of their social situation in other ways.
In social cooperatives, the work prescribed as personal contribution could only be performed in an employment relationship, a business relationship or a contract.
The Act on Cooperatives provides the possibility that, in certain cases, the legal relationship of membership alone is sufficient to work in the cooperative and to participate in the cooperative's joint economic activities.
However, it is unfortunate that this inherently good initiative is currently the source of many abuses.
The future Jobbik government will - in addition to preserving and developing good practices - eliminate these abuses.
The commercial banking system, which is mostly owned by foreigners, is currently unwilling to finance Hungarian agriculture,
therefore, immediate government action is required.
The bank of the countryside would be a cooperative bank (agricultural bank) operating as a specialized credit institution with the necessary market knowledge in relation to agricultural production,
its services would be adapted to regional or local conditions.
Based on the principle of "locally for the local people", the cooperative banks that were organized 150 years ago have withstood the test of time in several countries.
Cooperative banks are a significant market factor in twenty of the 28 member states of the European Union.
The bank of the countryside represents the financial basis for decentralization, the development of self-sustaining village communities, micro-regions and micro-regions.
The bank of the countryside therefore makes it possible to create a more secure future, the characteristics of which are the strengthening of the cooperative nature (e.g. the Ant cooperatives) and the acceptance of community ties and obligations,
i.e. the revival of the "bank of the countryside" idea, the mass acceptance of the takarékbank's "Takarékpont" program and close business integration.
In this way, the security of the entire country is increased,
the financial and economic vulnerability of our country decreases during global crises.
Financial decentralization also creates opportunities for independence from economic megastructures and local or sub-regional self-sustainability.
What would the implementation of Jobbik's ÉLE development plan mean?
In 4-5 years, 200-250 thousand new jobs were established in agriculture;
100,000 new jobs for domestic and export markets by establishing a ready-made Hungarian food industry;
the reopening of closed food factories,
saving those in crisis
and the opening of new ones;
the achievement of food self-determination against the practices of the Union and the multinational chains that degrade our national economy;
filling the shelves with Hungarian products instead of dumping foreign goods;
the establishment of state-supported agricultural, water management and food industry research and development centers to ensure a competitive sector level;
the creation of self-sustaining rural communities through the rural processing industry, machine manufacturing, waste, energy and water management;
the spectacular increase in domestic and foreign guests of tourism related to the countryside and the food industry,
at the same time, the strengthening of the country's image.
1.2 Water management, shipping and energy development plan
1.2.1 Let's pull our heads out of the sand!
The idea of ​​rational water management was already preoccupying the Hungarians living in the Carpathian Basin as early as the Árpád era.
So much so that traces of the former drainage and irrigation canal network can still be found in several locations in our country.
The Danube, the Tisza and our other rivers delivered abundant water supplies,
areas as large as part of the country were available for the continuation of flood plain management.
On the floodplain, during the tidal waves, an excellent spawning place for fish developed, so fishing provided a living for the people living there,
and after the water receded, the area was used for grazing.
Later, as the population grew, the need to grow agricultural crops, especially cereals, increased.
The drainage of floodplains and swamps, the regulation of rivers,
which took place most intensively in the reform era, following Széchenyi's water management and shipping plans.
As a result of the damming of the rivers, the size of the navigable sections increased,
and the ratio of arable and habitable areas also improved,
however, the drying up of the Carpathian Basin has also begun.
For the past hundred years, our water management has focused on the most efficient drainage of tides and inland waters, so this one-sided approach has shifted the water balance in a seriously negative direction.
Today, about five cubic kilometers - five thousand billion liters! – more water leaves our country through our rivers than enters it.
Another negative effect of this on the water balance is the deepening of riverbeds,
which is associated with the lowering of the ground water level and its complete disappearance in certain places.
This causes, among other things, the serious problems of the Danube-Tisza region, the Sand Ridge, which is also called desertification.
Added to all this is global climate change,
as well as the harmful effects caused by the increasingly extreme distribution and decreasing amount of precipitation.
There is no doubt that the situation calls for urgent intervention.
Despite this, no government has been able to achieve real results in the past 24 years in terms of improving water balance and increasing water retention capacity.
Moreover, the successive Fidesz and MSZP governments jointly swept the problem under the carpet.
1.2.2 The water barrier syndrome
The retention of our waters by damming, thus the implementation of navigable roads and hydropower plants, has been preoccupying decision-makers in Hungary for about a hundred years.
Governor Miklós Horthy first commissioned professor Emil Mosonyi to design the Danube barrage system, but due to the Second World War, it was never implemented.
Later, during the years of communism, the plans came up again, an intergovernmental agreement was signed with Czechoslovakia for the construction of a Bős and a Nagymaros power plant based on the plans created before the war.
However, since during Horthy's time the entire area affected by the investment was part of Hungary, the conditions changed significantly, which was ignored by the socialist decision-makers.
With this, the seed of an international conflict between the two countries that continues to this day was sown.
In the 1980s, a huge wave of protests started against the investment,
which mistakenly saw the prevention of the creation of the Bős-Nagymaros barrage as a symbol of the overthrow of socialism.
After the event known as the regime change, the plan failed in its entirety,
the Antall government terminated the international treaty, which has resulted in ongoing litigation and international legal conflict.
In response to our unilateral withdrawal, Slovakia arbitrarily diverted the Danube into an artificial channel established on its own territory.
The consequences of this were catastrophic for Szigetköz, as the water practically disappeared from the Danube.
So far, no government has dared to face the serious political legacy of this case,
we have been carrying the burden for more than twenty years now, without the slightest chance of a solution.
This is the reason why, before Jobbik's appearance in parliament, river regulation by damming was considered a political taboo in public life.
However, we say that decades of political dirt must be scraped off the water management professional issue,
and it must be re-examined solely with the interests of our country in mind.
This is one of the most important key issues in terms of settling the future of the Hungarian water issue.
1.2.3 Swelling economy
The Hungarian section of the Danube is 417 km,
of which, since Trianon, it is a 140 km long border river between Hungary and Slovakia.
The Tisza meanders through Hungary over a 579 km stretch.
If we only look at our two largest rivers, this means a total of 1,000 km of river section.
Today, the Danube has largely lost its natural river character due to the sediment retention effect of the 40 or so barrages built upstream and downstream.
Sediment hardly reaches the Hungarian section, but from here, in the absence of damming, the river carries it away, so the river bed deepens intensively, which has now exceeded 12 meters.
Since this already has catastrophic consequences for the groundwater balance of the Danube area, the solution cannot be postponed.
The water of the Danube must be held back by damming,
and at the dams, water reservoirs must be established, which is also a huge help in dealing with tidal waves, since they can be emptied before the arrival of the flood, and then a part of the tidal wave can be stored there in a regulated manner.
Almost every year we can see that a flood is followed by a severe drought within a few months.
In this case, the retained amount of water also mitigates drought damage in the form of irrigation,
and the damming itself is accompanied by a rise in groundwater, so the process of soil drying can be reversed.
According to Jobbik's ideas, barrages will be created at 3 places on the Danube, from south to north, at Fajsz, Adony, and at a suitable location above the Danube Bend.
With the help of these, in addition to the above, the problem of shipping can be solved,
and last but not least, these facilities can also be used to produce environmentally friendly, cheap electricity.
The dam above the Danube bend would also be a solution to the problem of water supply in Szigetköz.
On the Tisza, in addition to the existing two (Tiszalök and Kisköre), we are building a hydropower plant at Csongrád,
which will also play an important role in the operation of the Danube-Tisza canal.
So far, a total of 22 hydropower plants have been built on the Austrian, Slovenian and Croatian sections of the Drava River.
In 1988, the Hungarian and Croatian sides still agreed on the complex utilization of the lower section of the Drava.
The Balkan war and the withdrawal of the Hungarian side interfered with the implementation.
Here, too, the time has come for action.
According to Jobbik's ideas, the hydroelectric power plants will be built at Barcs and Drávaszabolcs on the Croatian-Hungarian border section of the river.
As for shipping, the Hungarian section of the Danube is not navigable or only with restrictions for about half of the year.
All of this contradicts our obligations in international contracts, according to which for standard ships with a maximum draft of 2.5 m, the annual min. On the 300th day, the navigability of the river must be ensured.
Since water is the most cost-effective mode of transportation, common sense also tells us that failure to use this opportunity will cause a huge loss of revenue for our country.
Not to mention that a significant part of the highly polluting and accident-prone road freight traffic could be replaced by shipping.
By the way, the floodgates also facilitate road traffic, as they function as a bridge and connect the two banks of the river.
The situation would be further improved by the construction of a canal connecting the Danube to the Tisza,
because new markets for Hungarian agricultural products would open up to the east, where it is not possible to deliver the goods competitively with the currently available land transport methods.
Improving shipping conditions in passenger transport is of enormous importance in tourism.
Due to the extremely poor navigability of the Hungarian section of the Danube, the companies operating the hotel ships currently sailing from Amsterdam to Budapest are considering sailing to Bratislava instead of the Budapest destination.
Of course, for Budapest, Hungary, this would mean an additional huge loss of income.
With regard to energy production, it is important to note that due to the positive effects listed above, it is definitely advisable to implement dams,
however, rationality dictates that they also function as hydropower plants, as this significantly shortens the payback period of the investment.
From the point of view of Hungary's energy independence
and for environmental protection reasons, the construction of electricity generation capacity from renewable sources of around 1000 MW (half of the Paks nuclear power plant) should be supported.
Due to the fluctuating performance of power plants using wind and solar energy, which are expected to play an increasingly important role in the future, the hydropower plant also fulfills a regulatory function in the electricity system.
Nevertheless, the investment can play a major role in the spread of the above-mentioned wind energy in Hungary,
because if the generated electricity is used directly to operate water-lifting pumps, it cannot cause power fluctuations in the network.
This is a type of energy storage that would be available anyway with the construction of the locks required for the Danube-Tisza canal.
The construction of the navigable canal connecting the Danube with the Tisza is also a century-old plan, which, although it has been realized, we still cannot enjoy its benefits.
Because the 123 km long canal connecting the two rivers between Baja and Óbecse, completed in 1802, lies entirely in Southern Region, in today's Serbia.
After Trianon, it became necessary to build another canal, for which several plans were created.
Of course, it is up to the specialists to determine the exact route, but at the moment the version between Tass and Szolnok seems to be the most feasible.
It includes a 100 km long two-way navigable canal,
as well as a 120-130 km long N-S irrigation canal, which can be used to supply water to practically the entire Homokhátság.
The route practically coincides with the planned route of the M8 motorway, so the costs related to the acquisition and the preparation of the route can be minimized.
The canal provides a waterway between the two rivers,
and delivers life-giving water to the drying sand ridge area.
In addition, in order to serve the freight traffic using the canal, we are building multimodal logistics centers, which offer a complex solution for both road, rail and water transport.
In addition to this, of course, we also create ports and logistics warehouse bases, thus maximizing the use of the benefits of being a transit country.
We want to start further developments in the area of ​​the ports, where we are handing over hotels, commercial and entertainment, as well as cultural centers.
But we will implement it for health and medical tourism,
as well as investments related to sports and recreation.
1.2.4 From degree to degree
Despite the regulations, the Tisza remained a distinctly middle-section river with meanders, backwaters that were naturally tied or cut through, and extensive floodplain forests with sandbars and sandbars.
The Hungarian section has a slow current and a low drop.
Before its regulation, it regularly flooded around two million hectares.
In addition to the high water in the spring and early summer, the Tisza also has a smaller autumn flood.
Its lowest water level occurs in winter.
All of these properties make it suitable, especially in its upper section, which is closer to its original state, to carry out the restoration of floodplain or floodplain management, which has a thousand-year tradition in our country, in the most suitable environment.
Our ancestors were engaged in fishing in the flooded area during the flood, and grazing livestock after the water receded.
The method is a natural way of dealing with floods, since we know that the largest amount of water can be stored in the soil.
In addition, the effect of the dry summer months can be reduced regionally with the retained amount of water, as it raises the groundwater level.
This way of landscape management gives a new direction to agriculture, which helps to nurture traditions
and takes the aspect of sustainability into account to the maximum extent.
The disadvantage is that it requires a change in the cultivation of the areas used as arable fields since river regulation.
The biggest obstacle to its current spread is the agricultural policy of the EU, which almost exclusively supports the cultivation of crops in fields.
What would the implementation of Jobbik VHE's development plan mean?
100,000 new jobs during the approximately 10-year duration of the investment;
tens of thousands of permanent jobs after the completion of the investment through operations and other related developments;
1000 MW of electricity from renewable energy sources;
stopping the annual water loss and continuous desertification of the country,
the rescue of Szigetköz;
a significant reduction in flood and drought damage,
the normalization of the groundwater level
and the expansion of irrigation possibilities;
the boom in cargo shipping
and the construction of the Danube-Tisza canal;
the boom in tourism;
the return of the thousand billion investment cost for the country within five years.
1.3 National energy security development program
1.3.1 Reloading
Today's form of globalization - however powerful and unstoppable it may seem - is very vulnerable,
due to its internal weaknesses and its financial system disconnected from the real flows of the economy, it can collapse at any time in a chain reaction-like fashion,
as it happened in 2008.
A program with a strategic approach must prepare for this as well, which is why we consider protecting, recreating and increasing national resources to be a defining task.
From the point of view of national self-determination, these defining resources include energy sources and the production, distribution and consumer infrastructure that ensures their use.
In our country, during the last two decades, almost everything in this sector has been sold,
ignoring that it is of strategic importance to a country that energy production and distribution operate under state management and control.
Extreme privatizations did not result in price reductions,
on the contrary, prices have risen drastically,
the neoliberal economic model has clearly failed.
With the liberalization of the energy markets, huge international monopolies were created in the European Union,
with a powerful political advocacy capacity.
International interconnection of energy systems,
diversifying transport routes in a technical dimension undoubtedly increases a country's security of supply.
At the same time, the national strategic goal is to increase energy production based on domestic resources.
It is a fact that more than half of our energy consumption in the 1980s still came from domestic sources,
but today the proportion of imports exceeds 70%, for hydrocarbons 80%,
while a much larger share of household income is spent on energy than in developed EU countries,
even though our per capita energy consumption is lower.
The increased utilization of domestic resources is regulated by the EU regulations,
and the demagogic propaganda of the extreme greens significantly hinders it.
Jobbik aims to reduce our country's vulnerability as much as possible by relying on its own energy carriers,
by increasing energy efficiency,
with the ban on privatization of domestic service providers,
by reviewing already concluded contracts.
1.3.2 Only energetically
The creation of new jobs in the field of energy, on the one hand, through the expansion and renewal of power plant capacities,
on the other hand, it can be created by increasing the production of domestic energy carriers.
When we compare the cost of domestic production and imported energy prices, we have to do it in a complex way,
taking into account the additional positive effects of domestically produced energy.
The construction of domestic power plants and the renewal of capacities create jobs directly and indirectly during construction (design, to a certain extent equipment production, direct construction activities, related deliveries),
this is supplemented by jobs related to operation.
The restart of the once world-class Hungarian power plant machinery manufacturing, with decades of tradition, could create thousands of jobs,
in addition, the initial cost of new power plants can be significantly reduced.
The expansion of the Paks nuclear power plant is desirable to the extent that it produces at least 50% of domestic electricity consumption as clean energy,
allowing electricity prices to be kept under control.
Russian-made, highly operationally safe reactor types can be a guarantee that the increased involvement of domestic specialists with appropriate experience
and the increase in the proportion of Hungarian suppliers can be realized during the construction of the new nuclear power plant.
Depending on the change in the world market price, it may become necessary to consider - in compliance with the strictest environmental protection regulations -
resumption of uranium mining,
which would create jobs,
and would increase security of supply.
In order to replace power plant capacities lost due to wear and tear, we must also plan the establishment of coal-based thermal power plants
– instead of selling carbon dioxide quotas, using them for their operation.
Here we can talk about the reopening of previously closed power plants
or even about building new ones.
With the development of technology, the so-called also the application of clean coal technologies, with the help of which the way is opened for a much more efficient and at the same time environmentally friendly use of the domestic coal stock.
By increasing the support for research and development, we encourage the development of cost-effective versions of these.
Thus, the extraction of domestic brown coal and lignite wealth becomes justified
(in the latter case, only in mines that have already been opened, prioritizing the protection of farmland),
creating tens of thousands of new jobs as a direct and indirect effect.
We must use the hydropower that can potentially be used on our rivers to the greatest extent possible,
producing 10-12% of domestic energy consumption with well-regulated, cheap and renewable energy.
These power plants would appear as an additional benefit through the construction of floodgates on the Danube and the Tisza, which are necessary for ecological, navigational, flood protection and water management reasons.
This large-scale state investment program would also be of decisive importance in terms of job creation.
The VTE development plan for Jobbik, discussed in more detail above, is about this.
In order to ensure that wind power plants with fluctuating performance depending on weather conditions do not cause instability in the energy system, in addition to the establishment of well-regulated, modern power plants, equalizing capacities must be established.
This task can be solved by building pumped reservoir power plants.
In the field of energy, in the creation of new jobs, in addition to the establishment and operation of new capacities based on domestic energy sources as much as possible
increasing energy efficiency can also play a significant role.
Subsequent thermal insulation of buildings,
modernization of the building technology of the properties,
and the spread of passive houses stimulates construction industry investments.
This is partly what the OTN development plan presented below is about.
1.3.3 What would the implementation of the development plan of Jobbik NEB mean?
hundreds of thousands of new Hungarian jobs in the energy and construction industries;
ensuring the country's energy security and energy independence to the greatest extent possible;
the reduction of household energy costs;
reasonable and environmentally friendly exploitation of domestic energy capacities;
the expansion of the Paks nuclear power plant with the largest possible involvement of Hungarian suppliers;
establishment of coal-based power plants;
ensuring the stability of our energy system by establishing pumped-reservoir power plants.
1.4 Mineral Resources Utilization Development Plan
1.4.1 Treasure what we have
Over the past 24 years, almost every sector has been the loser, and this is especially true for mining.
All post-regime governments have watched mining towns turn into ghost towns.
Moreover, instead of trying to do something about the process,
they even justified their own failure.
As a result, the claim that we are a country poor in mineral raw materials has gained civil rights in Hungary today.
This summary opinion is actually not correct, as the factual data of the geological assets, which have been surveyed, refute this.
How far and for what the known mineral wealth is sufficient is decisively determined by economic (world economic) indicators.
It can be stated that the extraction of lignite, crude oil and natural gas, non-metallic minerals and raw materials for the construction industry is competitive even when measured by world market prices.
The biggest opportunity is in the coal mining boom,
and depending on the results of the research, the restart of uranium ore mining should be considered.
We also consider it important to ensure the future production potential of the Makó gas fields,
by keeping the rights in national hands.
Hungary's coal assets are estimated at around 8.5 billion tons, of which 2 billion tons are in black coal, slightly more than 2.2 billion tons in lignite and 4.3 billion tons in lignite.
A distinction must be made between geological and extractable coal assets.
In the case of lignite, for example, the geological amount is 5.4 billion tons and the amount that can actually be extracted is 4.3 billion tons.
In the case of lignite, 2.2 billion tons of the geological quantity of 3.1 billion tons can be brought to the surface.
Extractability – how much of the stock is accessible – is determined by the local geological features and the technical level of extraction.
The amount that can be mined is not the same as the volume that can be used economically, which must be re-evaluated from time to time due to changes in the rules and the market.
This is determined, among other things, by the improving mining technology and the current world market price of coal and alternative energy carriers, supply and demand, and the cost of transportation.
Since we do not have a seaport, the cost of transportation for imported energy carriers is very expensive, and the competitiveness of domestic coal improves.
In 1990, mining in Hungary employed more than 60,000 people (coal mining: 50,000, uranium mining: 7,000, bauxite mining: 3,000, other mines: a few thousand people).
In the earlier period, the number of employees was much higher: in coal mining, for example, in 1964 (when production reached its peak with 31.5 million tons), 124,000 people worked.
According to experts, with the reopening of coal mines, bauxite mines and uranium mines, approximately half of the 60,000 jobs in 1989-90, i.e. 30,000 new, well-paying jobs can be created (the primary reason for the decrease is the technological development of the last two decades).
However, it should not be forgotten that one direct mining job results in the creation of at least three additional jobs on average (engineering, woodworking, construction, services, etc.).
In other words, we can talk about the creation of about 120,000 new jobs in total.
At the same time, it is important to add: we do not initiate the restart of bauxite mining at all due to environmental considerations,
and we make uranium mining dependent on the result of a local referendum.
There can be quite a wide variation in extraction costs between areas depending on the location of mineral resources, available technology and many other factors.
Nevertheless, based on the few available examples, reasonable estimates can be made.
As an example, we can cite the calculations of the exploitation of more than 438 million tons of high-quality black coal assets in the outskirts of Máza and Váralja in Eastern Mecs.
Coal can be brought to the surface relatively easily from the deep mine using modern technology.
Based on the calculations, HUF 80-85 billion would be needed for the service facilities and the construction of the ditches.
The mine will be capable of producing 1.2 million tons of coal per year after the launch, and after two years it will be able to operate at full capacity with an annual production of 2.4 million tons, for roughly 80 years.
The deep cultivation plant is directly two thousand,
and it would indirectly provide employment to 6-7 thousand workers.
In our country, significant and globally outstanding carbon chemistry research must be restarted even a few decades ago,
in order to utilize our coal assets in a different direction, not for energy purposes.
Carbon is the basis of all organic chemical processes, so we can use a synthetic process to produce fuel or other valuable products that can be sold at a much higher profit than heat or electricity obtained by simply burning coal.
It can be seen from this example that with an investment of a few hundred billion forints (which would be spread over several years), the production of many millions of tons of coal could start again in Hungary,
tens of thousands of new jobs could be created,
and the possibility of economic recovery could be created in entire regions.
A realistic medium-term objective in the coal mining industry is the development to a production level of 13-15 million tons per year
and its use in power plants.
And what few people know: the necessary CO2 quota is currently available in Hungary.
In order to make greater use of domestic coal resources, larger coal-based power plant capacities are needed than at present.
However, it is not necessarily necessary to build new power plants,
according to experts, it is also possible to reopen previously closed power plants (e.g. Tiszaújváros, which was shut down by AES at the end of March 2012, Tiszapalkonya and Berente, which were shut down by AES at the end of March 2011), the costs of which are much lower than a green field investment.
However, it is necessary to encourage the so-called new technology the spread of clean carbon solutions,
because with their help not only in an environmentally friendly way,
but the energy content inherent in our coal reserves can be extracted with a much higher efficiency than traditional coal-fired power plants.
Relaunching the domestic mining industry with private capital alone is unlikely to be possible.
In professional circles, there are very few mine opening initiatives, one of which is the East Mecsek project.
Smaller mines are also planned to be reopened in the Borsod area, but a collection power plant would also be needed in addition to these.
In Nógrád County, there are approximately 300 million tons of coal assets underground,
they are currently investigating how much of this can be extracted economically.
The energy carrier that can be extracted from the mines can primarily be used in the restarted local power plant,
but it can also be used for a future coal program for social purposes.
If the conditions are met, mining can also start in Ózd.
On Transdanubia, in Bakony, the Várpalota coal basin hides even more significant reserves that can be exploited.
It is also important to mention the rescue of our country's last working deep coal mine, the Márkus-hegyi mine,
which the Fidesz government intends to close on December 31, 2014, thus sealing the fate of both the mine and the Vértes Power Plant.
It is clear that strong state involvement is also necessary in this area.
However, in order to reduce the risks arising from the national strategic role of energy, import dependence and the fluctuation of input costs, this state role can definitely be said to be justified.
1.4.2 We put an end to the "uranium" curse!
Uranium ore mining in Hungary started in 1957 in Mecsek, on the border of the Kővágószőlős settlement.
Production began to decline in the mid-1970s and ended at the dawn of the regime change in 1989 due to its uneconomical nature.
Exact data on the amount of extracted uranium metal are still not available today.
Some specialists report a total production of 21 thousand tons of uranium metal.
During the period of operation, the plants employed nearly 8,000 people,
but in the city and its surroundings, employment was provided to thousands of people during the peak of production.
In the mid-2000s, the world market price of uranium ore rose to such an extent that the extraction of uranium ore left in the ground became profitable again.
Therefore, from 2007, a mining company with an Australian background restarted geological research in the former mining area.
The goal is to verify the accuracy of previous data
and establishing additional details about the location, extent and quality of the ore lenses using new exploratory drilling.
What would the implementation of the development plan of Jobbik ÁNYH mean?
restarting the Hungarian mining industry by creating 30,000 new jobs;
the creation of nearly 100,000 new jobs parallel to the launch of the sector through indirect effects;
achieving an annual output of 13-15 thousand tons in coal mining;
the restart of uranium mining in the light of world market processes;
the reopening of previously closed t power plant capacities;
the possibility of starting a state coal program for social purposes.
1.5 Home Creation National Development Plan
1.5.1 Family drama
It has long been known that the emigration spiral among young people is typically strengthened by three factors:
1.) Because of the costs associated with education, many students and their families decide (even after graduation) to try their luck abroad during their student years.
2.) The lack of jobs appears as a clear factor,
where the unemployment rate of the 15-24 age group is most frightening:
in the Great Plain, for example, this is double the similar figure in the neighboring Romanian region of Parthium.
3.) The third factor, and perhaps the easiest to improve, is the inaccessibility of the independent home.
According to statistical data, the number of young couples who do not only have their own house or apartment, but do not even have the opportunity to obtain their own sublet, is increasing.
thus, generational cohabitation typical of previous historical periods is becoming more and more common nowadays due to forced social reasons.
However, what worked centuries earlier has become the source of countless family disputes due to today's way of life.
For a long time, the so-called "socpol" and the housing support system in a broader sense served the sole purpose of enabling aspiring young people to get their own apartment, their own living space,
and thus this was considered one of the most important tools both in the demographic area and in the area of ​​slowing down and preventing emigration.
Very simply: if a larger apartment is easily accessible, a home large enough to raise more children, then these children are more likely to be born,
and their parents are less likely to seek prosperity abroad
– even if they can earn a decent living at home.
On the other hand, until the middle of the last cycle, only two or three banks offered the "socpol" worked out by previous governments.
and this was done under such meaningless, narrowing conditions that only a fraction of the young people involved could think of receiving the support.
In the aggravating circumstances, only one example is the fact that a maximum price per square meter was determined for apartments eligible for social housing, which could hardly be met in Budapest.
middle-class apartments were actually excluded from the system.
Thus, most of the families in the capital and the surrounding area fell out of reach of the discount for a long time.
In 2011, because of this, the reverse situation could also happen, that the few billion forints intended for this purpose were essentially "stuck".
It is important to note that the so-called housing subsidy can also be found in the ranks of successive budgets, where about four or five tasks are crammed,
and which, after its announcement, government communication regularly campaigns with the slip that "how much money the government spends on home creation and housing subsidies."
The situation, on the other hand, is that the majority of this amount goes to the symptomatic treatment of the foreign currency credit crisis on the basis of the exchange rate barrier, namely to the costs of the government's role in it,
but not a single new apartment is built from this, and not a single young family starting their life is allowed to more easily acquire the home
where it is worth having a child, and where the future can be planned.
It is therefore a fact that there was a dramatic gap between the communication of the governments of the past 24 years and the reality in the issue of housing subsidies.
1.5.2 Sweet home, sweet life
Jobbik would change this with a system that works hand-in-hand with the state rental housing construction and rental housing purchase system.
– with the help of a home creation program, which would be easily accessible to any Hungarian family working or intending to work.
In this, participants could rent an apartment for up to a third of the market price,
after a few years, they could buy it at cost, with the help of a very favorable, fully interest-subsidized, state-backed HUF loan.
The system would have a positive effect in three directions: on the one hand, it would create many new rental apartments, houses and rural homes (including farms with arable land).
On the other hand, it would boost the domestic construction industry, which is in crisis but is crucial for the strengthening of the national economy.
Finally, it would assess the vacant domestic real estate assets,
and would examine the ownership background of the hundreds of thousands of empty domestic apartments and houses, and what proportion of them could become real homes again.
At this point, we offer another helping hand to those with credit losses who have unfortunately already lost their home
- among the rescued and (partially through public employment) renovated apartments and houses, they too must find the one in which they can once again have an independent life and hope.
We consider it essential to emphasize that during both rental housing construction and renovation works, Jobbik's model would only work with qualified domestic contractors,
and in terms of suppliers, we would always contract with a Hungarian company if sufficient supplier capacity is available.
Unfortunately, the necessary domestic production is no longer available in many fields,
if, on the other hand, the system provides a fixed and guaranteed order, namely for many years, it will be worth reopening the brick factories, the mines,
to round out the domestic supplier network.
This home creation program can directly help 100,000 Hungarians: it would employ as many entrepreneurs, builders, and suppliers even after a few years of start-up, along with those who get homes.
Thus, even at the most expensive price level in Budapest, you can move into an average apartment of sixty square meters with a monthly rent of HUF 20-30,000.
then after eight to ten years you can buy the property at around cost price,
moreover, with a fully subsidized, state-backed loan,
and in case of trouble, with the family bankruptcy protection system.
The reason for the low prices is that the system does not want to make a profit, so we have excluded all price-increasing factors with a multinational background.
This is supported by the fact that we are clearly planning a central procurement of materials, which may be the cheapest form,
we further encourage suppliers to form clusters, thereby improving their competitiveness and prices.
1.5.3 There is no devil in the details either
Due to the national "discrimination" protecting suppliers, you can count on EU resistance,
but this can be easily defended: for example, the French also gave their own agriculture a similar type of protection,
in other words, it would not be unprecedented to protect the domestic industry.
By 2020, with the help of the program, the housing of citizens who are willing to integrate into society and wish to become useful members of it would become almost completely solvable,
moreover, depressed regions can be resurrected today with the targeted placement of apartments.
In addition, if the job-creating programs can be concentrated where the people who move in imagine their new lives, each Hungarian region can have a vision of the future with a smartly planned implementation.
Even in the first cycle, we can expect 30-40 thousand people in the housing segment alone,
and all of this would consume barely ten billion forints a year when it reaches the implementation stage.
Beyond the fact that an amount of this magnitude is abundantly available (either at the expense of integration funds from the budget, or at the expense of forced interest repayments and international commitments),
the ten-to-fifteen-year program could bring back the budget resources invested in the first round in four to six years,
since every forint deposited circulates in the domestic economy,
generate new tax and contribution payments here,
they also keep a large number of new jobs alive.
An important provision is that the real fulfillment of the home creation and rental housing construction program can be expected only if public safety is also restored,
therefore, the transfer of the budget resources needed for this cannot be postponed either.
During the construction of our rental apartments, we pay special attention to the orientation of the houses,
to create and maintain a healthy landscape structure,
and for providing habitats with passive and energy-saving techniques.
The reason for the latter is that it only makes sense to provide a cheap apartment with low maintenance costs.
Further cost savings could be achieved by extending the contribution benefits of those employed in the construction of rental housing,
as well as considering the introduction of reverse VAT.
We work with panels
We support the modernization of panel apartments in several areas,
our program covers the provision of window and door replacements, external thermal insulation,
as well as for supplying heaters with heat meters.
We support the improvement of energy efficiency with solar collectors.
In addition, we also carry out the development of district heating pipes, since a lot of energy is lost from them.
District heating can be a much more environmentally friendly solution than individual systems,
and thus the risk of accidents is also lower.
But its wide application can only be achieved in the long term by improving its efficiency.
Thanks to the above renovations, a significant part of the panel apartments could be classified in energy class "A", instead of the current "E" (41%) and "D" (25%).
At the moment, even almost half of the brick-built apartments in the capital are classified as "G" or "F", which shows an amazing waste of energy.
The development of this system is therefore equal to the real overhead reduction.
We therefore try to provide an interest-free loan for the renovations,
making sure that the panel programs do not run in the hands of the five or six economic companies that were typical in the past,
rather, by building on the domestic supplier and contractor base and creating thousands of new jobs, let us further strengthen our own economy.
What would the implementation of Jobbik's OTN development plan mean?
more than 10,000 jobs through state orders for the Hungarian construction industry;
suppliers of the Hungarian construction industry – mines, brick factories, construction material manufacturing, etc. - the recovery of his circle,
and thus the creation of thousands of new jobs;
favoring Hungarian suppliers over foreigners;
solving the majority of domestic housing problems by 2020;
for the foreign currency borrowers who lost their homes, the possibility of re-housing worthy of a human being;
through our energy saving panel program, the real and lasting provision of utility reduction;
the full payback of the home building program in four to six years.
1.6 Strategic Infocommunication Development Plan
1.6.1 The revolution that fits in the palm of our hands
It is no coincidence that the rise of information and communication technologies (ICT) and its impact on the economy and society are referred to by analysts as the third industrial revolution.
The first was the appearance of steam engines, the second was the spread of assembly line mass production,
the third is characterized by the fusion and convergence of IT and telecommunications technologies.
ICT permeates our everyday life.
Not only in everyday life, but also in the economy, where it has become one of the main engines of economic growth in recent decades,
and is expected to remain so in the future.
The aim of Jobbik's program has always been to combine respect for tradition with modernity.
It is clear that in a program like the Seven Leaders Plan, which sets out the breaking points of the Hungarian economy, information communication plays a central role.
It should also be noted that in recent years, a second IT revolution has unfolded within the third industrial revolution.
The appearance of tablets and smartphones, as well as the integration of IT systems into household appliances, means of transportation, and everyday objects are part of this.
We can only estimate the importance of this process at the moment, but it is certain that it will fundamentally transform our work, our free time, and our entire lives.
If used sensibly, there are serious opportunities ahead of us.
1.6.2 On the Hungarian fallow land
The ICT sector in itself accounts for a significant part of the Hungarian economy.
It is remarkable that it was able to grow even in the years of the economic crisis.
According to the relevant report of the OECD, compared to the entire business sector, the ICT sector accounted for 6.7% of the employed in 2009,
which can be said to be significant even in global terms.
About seventy thousand people work in the industry,
and this does not include IT professionals who work for companies operating in other sectors,
nor are computer manufacturers included.
The amount of tax paid exceeds HUF 300 billion annually,
and this sector accounts for 10 percent of all VAT payments.
As in Europe in general, the Hungarian labor market also shows a qualitative and quantitative shortage of IT professionals,
which affects both the ICT sector itself and sectors that use ICT,
and clearly limits the growth of the sector.
The problem already begins in public education: although it was written into the national core curriculum that the number of hours of IT education should be increased, IT education was reduced to half of the previous year in the framework curriculum.
The ICT sector is therefore one of the main sectors of the Hungarian economy,
however, to ensure that this remains the case in the future, with the favorable use of EU funds
it will also be necessary to eliminate the shortage of professionals.
For Jobbik, the challenge is not only to maintain growth,
rather, our goal is to make Hungary a great power in the ICT sector.
The ICT applications of society and companies have a greater impact on the development of the economy and the improvement of efficiency than the sector itself.
We are in serious trouble here.
In a European comparison, companies' Internet access is only sufficient for 20th place.
The website provision of businesses shows an even worse picture.
The backlog in the field of issuing and accepting electronic invoices is also significant,
where Hungary, with its figure of 1.5%, is the driving force behind international comparisons.
In recent years, Hungarian businesses have undergone serious development both in the field of online procurement and online sales,
but they still did not manage to catch up to the EU average.
The above growth data is also confirmed by the businesses' revenues from e-commerce.
We don't usually see public administration directly as a part of the economy.
At the same time, the determining international competitiveness indicators regard the quality of the public administration as a decisive factor in the country's competitiveness, not by chance.
Flexible, efficient and customer-friendly public administration not only improves people's well-being,
but also provides the right environment for businesses.
ICT applications and e-public administration play a decisive role in this.
According to Eurostat data, we are at the bottom of the middle range in terms of electronic public services provided to the population.
We are already in last place in the EU comparison of e-public services provided fully online for businesses.
In terms of the use of mandatory e-government services, the Hungarian data show a value almost 40% lower than the European average.
With this indicator, Hungary ranks 30th out of 32 countries in Europe.
Hungary has fallen away from the European leader in the use of the Internet:
only 55% of people use the Internet,
And 43% do not have a computer at all.
The proportion of those who have never used the Internet is slightly higher than the EU average, 26%.
Our country also lags behind the EU average in terms of coverage and provision.
Broadband networks reach 92% of households against the EU average of 95%,
while 72.5% of families in the EU and 68% in Hungary have a subscription.
Added to all this is the fact that the prices of internet subscriptions, calculated on purchasing power parity, are higher than the EU average.
Internet access of households does not seem to have a direct effect on economic processes.
However, reality shows otherwise.
Although electronicization may result in a decrease in employment in some sectors, the extent of expansion exceeds this:
combining the two effects, according to a study, the change in the number of employed people related to the spread of broadband and the use of ICT shows an annual surplus of 105,000 people at the EU level.
For many years, the most important lack of the Hungarian infocommunications market has been to be found on the demand side.
The lack of digital competence also strongly inhibits GDP growth:
according to a survey, the gap between the average of the EU countries and our country in terms of the proportion of digital literates means a GDP loss of about HUF 197 billion for Hungary.
According to research, the proportion of digitally illiterate people is around 44%.
Broadband internet penetration (the number of subscriptions per 100 inhabitants) in Hungary was 22.9% in 2013, compared to the EU average (28.8%).
The lag in computer penetration is also significant.
Among the reasons for non-use, mainly cognitive, knowledge and motivational barriers dominate.
Most of them are still not interested in computers (and the online world),
or they feel that its use is of no benefit to them.
There is still a significant proportion of respondents who stay away due to incompetence,
while fewer refer to financial reasons.
1.6.3 The state must not fall!
In the field of information communication, the deficiencies that directly and indirectly hinder the development of the Hungarian economy are clearly visible.
The solution can be many and, of course, only partially depends on the state.
The situation is partially improved by spontaneous social processes, such as fashion following or generational change,
but state intervention cannot be avoided either.
Government activity can also be of various kinds.
There are things that can be improved with regulatory tools - such as price competition between service providers.
Elsewhere, public policy tools (information, promotion, cooperation with civil organizations) are the solution.
And there are cases where financial support from public funds is justified,
including the use of European Union development funds.
On the part of the government, the IT development of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) is of particular importance,
support for "startup" companies,
increasing research and development activity,
the development of digital competences,
expansion and deepening of e-public administration,
and the expansion of education in both primary and secondary schools,
both in specialized IT and engineering education.
We particularly emphasize the importance of open source technologies, which can be used by the public sector, households and businesses to operate more efficiently and cost-effectively.
With the introduction of these systems and the unification of public administration systems, savings of around HUF 100 billion could be achieved annually in the public sector alone by saving license fees and eliminating wasteful, parallel developments.
By switching to open source systems in the corporate and private sector, the savings on license fees can be even more significant.
By using open source systems, we can replace multinational monopolies with Hungarian businesses,
thus, its economic stimulating and employment-expanding effect is also significant.
The XXI. in the second decade of the 20th century, it is time to also say: internet use is no longer a luxury or a hobby, but a basic infrastructural need,
the quality of which also determines the success of the road to the future.
At the same time, we also say: access to the Internet is now a basic right,
which, if necessary, should be provided even free of charge to all Hungarians.
Let 2014 be the year of free internet!
The ICT sector and SMEs operating in the sector can play a key role in stimulating domestic economic growth
and in increasing competitiveness,
in addition to the improvement of the export capacity.
An important goal is to promote the appearance of domestic ICT companies on foreign markets,
stimulating the export of software and services.
In order to develop the sector to an appropriate extent, we support the initiative of the Association of Information Technology, Telecommunications and Electronics Enterprises (IVSZ) to review the plans for the 2014-2020 planning period in the use of EU funds in order to ensure that the ICT sector is also in line with the community economic revitalization plans be in place.
Our goal is for the sector to receive direct support of at least HUF 600 billion, in accordance with its weight in proportion to GDP.
In order to reduce the shortage of professionals, an important goal is to expand higher education places,
motivating applicants for training with scholarships,
raising the standard of training
and ensuring consistency with the needs of the ICT sector.
1.6.4 Economic and social gain
In addition to the development of the ICT sector, it is at least as important that increasingly integrated ICT applications spread widely in the most diverse segments of the economy.
The state can primarily support this indirectly, for example by training general user skills,
by supporting the strengthening of digital competences,
and with the development of e-public administration services,
by making it mandatory where appropriate.
Therefore, we aim to spread electronic commerce by promoting e-procurement, e-invoicing, e-payment and e-tax return,
the creation of a legal environment that supports the development of the e-economy, even with tax incentives that strengthen the e-economy
and the introduction of digital identification solutions (digital card and other carrier-based identification).
We also create training and motivation programs for SMEs,
the establishment of a free database and a portal enabling intelligent search for the products and services of Hungarian SMEs.
Among the many elements of our economic competitive disadvantage, improving the competitiveness of public administration is - despite all its difficulties - one of the easiest areas to develop.
Electronicization makes government operations faster, more transparent and cheaper.
Therefore, we cannot lower the goal that the electronic public administration services available to the population and businesses will finally reach the level of the European forefront.
We create the availability of public administration systems and the customer portal using any telecommunications device.
During the transformation of the customer portal system, we pay special attention to security improvements.
We introduce two-step identification,
and we integrate the possibility of using an electronic signature.
In order to ensure that public administration services are generally – as a medium-term goal – the only way to use the internet, we are making the community internet access points (most often eHungary points) suitable for public administration in all settlements.
Since e-administration is individual and personalized, consultants are needed to help with entry and administration.
The assistants can already perform training and development tasks at the community points, strengthening digital competences in general.
Unemployment is a serious problem,
one of the consequences of which is that there are no employees over the age of 50 for the large number of vacant positions, because the majority of representatives of this age group do not have the knowledge and openness that today's employers expect.
In today's European economies, only 10 percent of workers who do not have ICT skills are needed.
Therefore, one of the most important means of mass job creation is to strengthen and develop the digital competences of job seekers,
thereby improving their chances of resettlement.
Infocommunication knowledge and skills are also essential for teleworking.
For employees with disabilities, we provide discounted devices and internet to facilitate remote working.
We recycle machines scrapped from the public administration and the business sector by handing them over to the needy.
Since the foundations of the IT boom can best be laid at a young age, we support the promotion of the spread of digital teaching materials in education.
All textbooks and other educational materials must be made available in digital form.
We create a digital knowledge base from the collected materials.
Through the spread of online distance education, we include the disadvantaged in secondary and higher education.
We support lifelong learning through distance learning.
Through primary school IT education, we promote the early acquisition of basic skills.
We also teach the use of electronic public administration services as part of IT subjects,
we provide a free ECDL exam to all high school graduates.
We coordinate the IT training offer with the market needs, in order to improve employment opportunities.
We introduce the use of ICT tools in the teaching of subjects other than IT education.
To this end, we provide teachers with continuing IT training,
and we develop digital teaching materials.
In culture, we digitize library materials with expired patent protection,
and we make it available for free.
We also provide access to copyrighted materials in the library system, but also in electronic form.
In order to provide more diverse and balanced information, we support the spread of Hungarian-language internet television and radio stations.
The VAT on electronic books, newspapers and magazines (ebooks) will be reduced from the current 27% to 5%, to the VAT level of printed books, newspapers and magazines.
We make access to the broadband network a subject's right.
As part of this, it provides a limited but free mobile internet service to anyone who requires it.
Free internet does not mean free internet access of any kind,
but it defines a service package that - as a basic service - all service providers must provide to their customers.
In order for the free internet to take into account both social needs and industry development, and to introduce a package suitable for all aspects with legal support, we initiate an intensive social and professional dialogue with the organizations of the sector and civil actors.
1.6.5 What would the implementation of Jobbik SIK's development plan mean?
doubling the number of people working in the ICT sector,
and a significant increase in the sector's economic performance;
the competitive Hungarian IT gray population to stay at home
and luring emigrants home
the creation of tens of thousands of new jobs through indirect positive social and economic effects;
provision of free basic mobile internet service to Hungarian citizens;
quickly catching up with the leading countries in Europe in the spread of public administration, corporate and social ICT applications;
free ECDL exam for all high school students, built into the curriculum;
state-supported digital competence-enhancing courses for job seekers;
free device and internet for employees with disabilities.
1.7 Health tourism development plan
1.7.1 Home advantage
Along with the aging of the population of the developed world, life expectancy is also increasing,
thus, the burden on the health care system of each country increases significantly.
The demand for care, which has increased several times over the past few years, has led to supply shortages and the formation of waiting lists in some areas.
Because of this and due to the increased costs, foreign medical treatments, which are often cheaper but safer, are increasingly coming to the fore.
The world health tourism market has been showing a strong annual growth of around 10 percent for years,
of which Hungary - despite its excellent capabilities - was only able to participate to a small extent.
The governments led by MSZP and Fidesz talked about the development of the area, but in the last 24 years they had neither the strength nor the knowledge to solve it.
What we have achieved, we have achieved rather in spite of the governments or regardless of the governments.
In those areas, for example, where institutional factors influenced by the state did not hinder the healthy development of enterprises (e.g. in the field of dental tourism), Hungarian enterprises performing at world standards became market leaders in Europe.
With the conscious development of the health tourism sector, tens of thousands of new domestic jobs will be created,
the standard of Hungarian public health care is improving considerably,
and we can acquire a significant share in the world's most profitable and at the same time fastest growing tourism business.
The government's ideas concerning Hungarian health tourism are one-sided and out-of-date,
this can be clearly seen in the distribution of development resources and in the case of institutional factors hindering Hungarian health tourism developments.
Health tourism developments were almost exclusively concentrated on spa investments based on domestic tourism,
while the development of medical tourism based on medical interventions is hindered by many factors.
1.7.2 Wellness will also be better
Preventive and recreational tourism is primarily aimed at preserving, developing and regenerating the health of healthy people, where various spa services are mixed with leisure sports, sauna, solarium and fitness services.
Within the framework of preventive and recreational tourism based on the predominance of tourist services, wellness hotels and adventure spas, often based on natural healing factors, were built all over the country primarily to satisfy domestic needs.
Their popularity is shown by the fact that six of the ten most popular domestic tourist destinations are registered as health resorts.
For the majority of investments in the field of preventive and recreational tourism, significant amounts of development were carried out, with a significant proportion of them coming from community funds.
In addition, the state also started to artificially stimulate the market in this area with central measures:
by providing non-wage benefits (cafeteria) and encouraging employers to provide Széchenyi Holiday Cards with a tax discount,
but the Erzsébet program provided for the socially needy can also be classified here.
This is of course good and welcome,
but for the sake of being honest, let's say: the domestic popularity of wellness hotels has not brought about any demonstrable improvement in the level of health in Hungarian society,
its value appeared more in the field of tourism.
The reserve for the development of preventive and recreational tourism is primarily foreign tourists and the selection based on a much less seasonal attraction.
At the same time, we have to see that with the strengthening of the experience spas in other Central and Eastern European countries, the tourism offer based purely on the existence of natural healing factors has lost its appeal.
and in itself is becoming less and less competitive.
This foresees the necessary development of the service offering,
which not only offers more spending options,
but it also means considerably longer tourist seasons.
Although internationally renowned domestic spas are currently performing well, there is already a significant,
there is a reserve that can be exploited by expanding the supply.
By increasing the complexity of services,
with the rise of medical wellness, which combines medical and wellness tourism,
by displaying complex medical packages, the current spending of spa destinations' clientele can be multiplied.
It is a remarkable fact, and at the same time a good indication of the size of the reserves in the system, that while an average spa visitor spends only one or two tens of thousands,
the amounts spent in tourism based on medical services are usually in the millions.
In addition to the development of the offer, it is also important to create professional level, targeted marketing supported by the state.
Health tourism marketing is not just about creating tens of thousands of new jobs
and supports increasing the revenues of the health tourism sector,
but it greatly contributes to the creation of a positive country image
and, through this, also to stimulate the desire to invest.
Health tourism marketing supported by state funds pays off many times over,
since it not only generates significant additional income within the tourism sector, but also represents a market and a driving force for the health industry.
It should not be forgotten that in health tourism, every forint of income from the savings of foreign tourists in other countries is channeled directly to Hungary.
Uniform health tourism marketing must appear in a consciously designed, wide selection in the offer of the largest domestic and foreign travel agencies,
and in some well-organized communities formed by elderly people and patients.
Due to the strong competition in the region, it is important that the applicability and therapeutic effects of domestic spas are supported by state-certified balneological research.
This is not only important for convincing tourists coming on their own,
but also because the proven effectiveness of balneology means a growing demand from foreign public and private health insurance companies,
the mass use of physiotherapists and massage therapists opens up space,
as well as before other medical interventions that generate significant income.
Since both domestic spas based on natural healing factors and the necessary medical knowledge are available, it is necessary to create a uniform internet interface that organizes knowledge, meets the requirements of quality country marketing, supports direct sales, and makes it available in the languages ​​of the target countries in a thematic breakdown the entire range of Hungarian health tourism.
Taken as a whole, it can be said that the competitiveness of preventive and creative tourism, the return on the investments made by the expansion of the offer for medical purposes,
by prioritizing medical services
and with the tourist seasons lengthening as a result,
can be significantly improved with more effective marketing than before.
1.7.3 Health tourism superpower
Medical tourism is specifically aimed at improving health, healing, reducing complaints, and regaining (temporarily) lost abilities.
The range of domestic spas - with significant overlaps - can be classified partly here and partly in the field of preventive and recreational tourism, depending on whether their use is for health preservation or healing.
The positive state measures implemented in the field of preventive and creative tourism - with the exception of spas - barely covered medical tourism based on the predominance of medical services.
The Orbán government intervened in medical tourism in an inappropriate way and provided billions of taxpayers' money where it was least needed: dental tourism.
However, domestic dentists were able to become market leaders in Europe without state aid, even on a purely market basis.
while the sale of other medical interventions to foreigners is currently hindered by the poorly regulated, uncompetitive state.
The success of the dental industry, which has become a European market leader in the face of strong market competition, clearly shows the potential inherent in the Hungarian medical tourism potential.
Hungarian dental companies joined forces and organized their own business activities: they acquired a foreign market,
they took care of everything from health assessment to follow-up care, including patient transportation and accommodation.
The dental offices, which typically specialize in Western European patients, spend approx. They treat 70,000 foreign patients.
The income from dental tourism – including indirect tourism expenses – can be estimated at around HUF 70 billion.
Although Hungarian dentists send a significant amount of paying patients to Hungary, the inherent business potential still hides serious reserves.
Due to their age and state of health, a significant proportion of patients would also use other health services,
but at the moment these are not offered to them - in the absence of a unified and organized health tourism marketing activity.
The use of medical services abroad requires not only the physical availability and favorable price of the services,
but also gaining the trust of patients.
Gaining trust through state support for the naturalization of the quality certificates of the sending countries
and we can support it by increasing the extension of state health care to foreign patients.
Through the nationalization of the quality certification of the major patient-sending countries, it is not only possible to win over paying patients who come individually,
but we can also offer a marketable solution to foreign public and private health insurance companies,
thus, within the framework of organized travel, even tens of thousands of patients waiting for surgical intervention, spending millions per person, can travel to Hungary within the framework of the sending country.
A program should be launched to assess the health industry businesses that can be included in the health tourism offer,
to develop their equipment park,
to strengthen their professional and language skills,
to increase the complexity of their offer.
The creation of investments in the health industry must be encouraged with state subsidies, tax incentives, and the launch of preferential central bank loan programs
and the strengthening of businesses operating in this area.
In addition to traditional commercial accommodation, medical tourism based on surgical interventions requires the so-called establishment of medihotels,
or the development of a part of traditional commercial accommodation and disused hospital wings into medihotels.
A medihotel is a building or part of a building separated from the hospital, which is suitable for hotel-like accommodation of patients in need of treatment, specialist care, and supervision and for meeting their special needs at a high level.
The state must also play an active, initiating role in the development of the domestic health tourism industry.
Interstate negotiations must be conducted with those countries where there is a shortage of care in some areas requiring medical intervention, longer waiting lists have been created,
perhaps the necessary services are provided at a price level well above the Hungarian market price.
State cooperation, state supervision extended to private health care providers, and patient follow-up with state cooperation increase the trust invested in cross-border health services,
and can be the driving force behind the acquisition of some large-scale, organized markets (public and private insurance companies).
There are several states that are health tourism sending countries, where private insurance companies or employers offer their clients the option of foreign medical treatment included in the insurance package due to the high cost of locally available health care.
In other cases, the availability of care suffers due to capacity problems in the local health sector,
and organized health tourism based on an interstate agreement, which is a reassuring solution for the sending state and its patients, can be a possible way to eliminate the resulting waiting lists.
It is important to emphasize: we do not wish to support under any guise, in fact, we will prevent the return of functional or any other privatization that gained ground under the MSZP governments, either under the guise of health tourism or otherwise.
When we talk about medical tourism investment, we are always talking about the creation of new capacities, green field investments,
which does not limit the possibilities of the current publicly funded system.
The development of Hungarian health tourism with active state participation will create well-paying, secure jobs for tens of thousands of Hungarians in a short period of time.
Our goal is nothing less than to make Hungary one of the world's recognized and innovative health tourism superpowers by making use of our capabilities and with expedient and professionally grounded development policy measures.
Last but not least, it must be said that state intervention in the sector must also mean a significant state share,
and according to our plans, the revenues expected here can - more precisely: must be - invested in the development of Hungarian healthcare,
by creating a separate state fund in the budget.
In other words, the money spent here by able-bodied foreigners coming to our country for treatment will result in a noticeable improvement in domestic inpatient and outpatient care,
as well as in the expansion of domestic opportunities for medical research and development.
What would the implementation of the Jobbik EÜT development plan mean?
tens of thousands of jobs within the sector and in related areas;
the increase in keeping Hungarian doctors and nurses working abroad or preparing to do so at home;
reducing the lack of funds in the Hungarian health sector,
the return of profits in the sector to Hungarian health care,
as well as the support of sectoral research and development by investing state medical tourism revenues channeled from abroad;
the operation of a coordinated, state-supported medical tourism marketing activity;
the establishment of medihotels or their establishment within hospitals;
the support of Hungarian-owned health industry enterprises related to the sector and forming a circle of suppliers;
Improving the country's image by becoming a world power in health tourism.
2. The 60 step program
The Seven Leaders plan by Jobbik Let's say it, we'll solve it! summarized the seven pillars of his program through which we would fulfill the most important objective of the entire program, job creation.
Seven big plans, with the help of which we could create jobs that ensure a decent living for the Hungarian people.
As we said, if there is work, there is everything, if there is no work, there is nothing.
However, it must also be taken into account that the future Jobbik government will not be able to implement its job creation plan under ideal laboratory conditions, but rather 40 years of communism
and shattered and crippled by 24 years of globalist neoliberalism in Hungary.
The six cycles that have passed since the so-called system change have caused enormous disappointment.
We can say that after 24 years we are in the 24th hour and urgent intervention is needed.
The 60-step program covers the six crisis areas and fate issues that the Jobbik government must first deal with before it can start implementing the Seven Leaders plan.
Six social problems, the solution of which will not be easy, but it is possible.
Six areas in which the governments of the past period can show either no results or only half as many results.
These are, in order, land protection,
the currency crisis,
population decline,
sustainable overhead reduction,
the Hungarian-gypsy coexistence
and the national debt.
We want to solve the six problems in 51 steps.
Just as the number seven had a meaning in the Seven Leaders plan, the 51 steps also suggest something.
If we take 100 as a unit, as a whole, then with 51 steps we are over the first half of our undertaken work.
Hardly.
Then you can focus on the rest, job creation and other sectoral programs.
But before that, we have to do these 60 steps.
2.1 Land protection
2.1.1 We tell the truth!
The issue of protecting Hungarian land is evident.
Our land - along with our water and energy sources - is our fundamental treasure, which in a normal situation could not even be discussed in business.
Unfortunately, today's world and today's Hungary are not like that.
Here, land is capital that can be given and taken, because of our self-giving EU negotiators, i.e. our governments.
From our point of view, it can be taken away from us.
However, for Jobbik, the land is mother land, the protection of which we consider a mandatory task at any cost.
The land moratorium will expire in May this year, i.e. at the moment of the formation of the new parliament.
At the time of accession, Hungary received the land moratorium in order to bring land property prices up to the EU average.
The price of Hungarian land is a fraction of that of Western Europe.
From this point of view, the moratorium is perfectly ethical and perfectly logical.
First, the given 7 years have passed,
then, after the gap between Hungarian and European prices had not changed, we were given another 3-year opportunity.
The grace period also expires next year, and if we look at it, nothing has changed either.
In other words, the state of emergency has not changed, but the moratorium will end.
And the government feels that all is well.
The decision of the Bulgarian parliament is an example of how a member state can defy the will of Brussels.
Bulgaria joined later, so they have only had their first 7 years, but the European Commission's huge indignation over the decision of the Bulgarian parliament to extend the moratorium for six years instead of three, with 70% support, speaks for itself.
Indeed, Bulgaria did not start negotiating with Brussels about the possible extension, but simply passed such a law,
and announced that he is ready to face EU sanctions to defend his right.
This would also be necessary in Hungary,
and only Jobbik can undertake this decisiveness.
The government usually refers to the power of the land law it created,
about which Viktor Orbán himself said several times that it was created based on the strongest examples of the EU, the Austrian, French and Danish models.
This is not entirely true either.
Land protection committees, which are one of the key elements of the system, can – understandably – represent their own narrower group interests and, not to the exclusion of all, individual interests.
Keeping Hungarian land in Hungarian ownership is the basis of our state sovereignty,
national strategic primary matter,
so we cannot entrust this to local committees.
It must be guaranteed by law.
But anyway, what is the guarantee that what works in Western Europe will also work here?
Nothing.
To what extent can the Hungarian economic society be compared to the French, Austrian and Danish ones?
No matter how much
How similar are their capital strength, competitiveness, and market acquisition opportunities?.
No matter how much
To what extent did the Hungarians manage to catch up with the land prices there?
No matter how much
Overall, we can say: the government's policy did not protect the land.
He merely imitated it.
It is revealing that when the government speaks, it never says that it is fighting against foreign ownership.
He states that he will exclude speculators.
How is that so?
Hard to believe
but what should be noticed: we don't only have a problem with speculators.
For us, the minimum and not the final goal is that there should be no speculation in the case of land, whether domestic or foreign.
We clearly want to prohibit foreign ownership as well,
even if it is not speculative in itself.
Keeping Hungarian land in Hungarian hands is a national strategic interest,
which we are obliged to enforce at any cost.
A national government cannot waive this, but states in the Basic Law that
and if necessary, he fights for it.
He is waging a war of economic freedom.
We undertake this, and not just in words.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that when we talk about land protection, our task is not only to prevent foreign property acquisition,
but the Latin American type, monoculture, dominated by oligarchs,
also preventing the formation of large estates employing few workers.
Jobbik considers a land ownership structure based on competitive family farms to be a goal to be pursued.
We solve it in 10 steps!
1. Extension.
The extension of the moratorium is only symptomatic, but in the current urgent situation it will be the first step of the future Jobbik government,
either with or in spite of Brussels.
We need this time gain so that we can settle the land issue in a reassuring way instead of the current chaotic one.
2. Basic Law.
The next Parliament must establish in the Basic Law that Hungarian land can only be owned by the Hungarian state, Hungarian self-government or Hungarian natural person.
3. Amendment.
If we have recorded the will of the Hungarian people in the Basic Law, it is necessary to have it accepted by Brussels, that is, to amend our accession treaty.
Here, we must indicate to the EU that this is a strategic issue of such importance for Hungary that we will fight for until the very end,
even at the cost of exiting or leaving the community.
4. Protection.
Land protection legislation should be introduced that excludes land speculation,
that is, it records the purpose of land use for food production and providing food security.
5. Accountability.
Collection of various land-related abuses,
disclosure,
initiating the necessary measures,
and the accountability of domestic land barons.
6. Allowance.
The purpose of land grants subject to public purpose and public interest conditions (permanent land use) is to improve the property structure,
creating food security,
halting population decline,
the foundation of family farming based on own work,
the service of the quality of life of the countryside and society.
7. Exclusion.
The exclusion of the large estate system must be recorded as a constitutional state goal in the Basic Law.
8. Plant regulation.
We confirm the state's commitment to the purpose and organizing principle of agricultural farm regulation.
Which means the principle of "one owner one plant",
and the maximum size of the plant at the level that ensures the livelihood of an average Hungarian family.
Today, this is 50-200 hectares (the lower value may be smaller in the case of intensive crop cultivation and foiling).
Finally, it must be noted that whoever owns a piece of Hungarian agricultural land, which is part of the national property, is also obliged to create the highest possible number of jobs for himself, his family or his employees.
Today, this is realistically - depending on land quality and culture - an average of 5-25 hectares (0.5 hectares for foiling, over 25 hectares for field crops or grazing).
9. Liquidation.
Wrapping up cases of land taken for foreign use on the basis of pocket contracts,
preventing land registry rewrites,
and the restoration of lawful states.
10. Prohibition.
We will enforce the ban on the practice of capital investment that conceals the illegal acquisition of foreign land, developed over the course of two decades of real estate development.
In such cases, what happened was that the state or the local government concluded a sale and purchase agreement with the foreign capital investors for the transfer of the ownership of the parcel of land extracted for this purpose and reclassified as real estate.
2.2 Way out of the currency trap
2.2.1 We tell the truth!
Today, even major research institutes recognize that the growth prospects of the Hungarian national economy are deeply undermined by the fact that a significant part of the population typically pays for foreign financial institutions instead of domestic consumption and purchases from small and medium-sized Hungarian enterprises.
It has also become well known that the conclusion of these credit agreements, at least in a unstable legal environment,
in addition to classified abuses
and in many cases it was done with the "help" of agents without credit broker qualifications.
The fundamental demand of broad circles of society is to rectify this situation,
since the problem on a macroeconomic level also affects those who do not have a similar loan.
We must also point out that the vast majority of those with credit losses did not take out loans for luxury items or vacations abroad, but to build a home, renovate or maintain their lives
- he received little help for this from state programs.
Along with the process and abuses, neither the MNB, nor the financial supervision and the competition office, nor the opposition at the time raised their voices with sufficient force,
thus they share the responsibility.
Ferenc Gyurcsány and his government "let the Austrian, Italian, and German banks, which colonized the financial system, attack the unsuspecting Hungarian citizens."
And when the biggest domestic banks realized that the government policy opened the way for the latest dangerous banking operations, most of them simply entered this business.
Together, these companies tricked the majority of those involved into the trap of foreign currency loans.
At that time, even the World Bank considered the situation dangerous,
nevertheless, the socialists did nothing to stop the increase in the number of contracts based on similar "defective products".
The management of the Hungarian National Bank and the Ministry of Finance between 2004 and 2008 are also responsible, because their members were aware of the risk of franked loans from the beginning (if for no other reason, then because the president of the Swiss central bank wrote a letter about this to his Hungarian colleague, Zsigmond Járai in the summer of 2004),
but nothing was done about it.
The National Bank is particularly responsible for keeping the central bank interest rate at an unreasonably high level for almost a decade, well above the level of inflation,
thereby making HUF loans unrealistically expensive.
All the governments involved are also responsible for not handling this problem affecting the entire national economy at all or completely wrongly.
As a result of this, the catastrophic situation developed: the loan stock of households swelled three times between 2004 and 2008,
And at the end of 2008, the amount of loans extended was already 30 percent larger than that of cash deposits placed in banks.
By now, Fidesz may have realized its original crime in the development of the credit crisis: in 2001, it allowed unilateral amendments to contracts.
Thanks to this and Jobbik's attention-grabbing signature campaign, the government promised to save foreign currency borrowers.
However, the proportion of residential mortgage loans for which the installment is paid late increased from 23 percent in the middle of the cycle to 35 percent at the beginning of the fourth year.
The National Asset Manager was not able to help the masses,
in addition, the state organization's assistance still requires the permission of the main perpetrator, the lending bank.
The housing estate in Ócsa can also be considered a scam for the needy,
which, although it provides a new home for a couple of families, does not ensure the possibility of organizing their lives in all respects,
thus, the reproduction of their troubles can be expected.
The government's ideas, which promised to provide substantial assistance for home protection purposes to foreign currency loan debtors, also failed.
above all, those who have payment difficulties or overdue debts, since prepayment linked to exchange rate fixing only helped the wealthier and luckier,
and many were forced into forint loans in order to get rid of those based on Swiss francs or other currencies.
And the exchange rate barrier is just a breather,
and in addition to postponing the payment obligation,
in several cases, he extracts an agreement from the injured party, which makes it more difficult to challenge the original, abusive contract later on.
We solve it in 10 steps!
1. Forint payment.
Jobbik sees the solution in forint conversion of foreign currency loans at the exchange rate at the time of admission.
Only in this way can all the consequences of their damage be returned to the commercial banks,
and only in this way can credit victims be exempted from the costs unjustifiably imposed on them.
This is especially justified because in some periods, compared to the one and a half times change in the exchange rate, the installments became more expensive,
and in the case of other contracts, one-third of the amount to be paid consisted of an item not dependent on the exchange rate, yet its level rose similarly to that of any other fee.
In addition, the fact that many banks also accounted for their handling costs in foreign currency can only be settled using the above method,
and in addition to the exchange rate difference, he also charged his customers the increase in the rent of the bank building.
2. Compensation.
In addition, the injured parties are entitled to compensation in proportion to the amount by which they were forced to repay more than justified.
Furthermore, we achieve a free choice of bank for foreign currency borrowers.
In the spirit of this, customers should be able to decide for themselves which financial institution's offer they will accept during the partial or full forint conversion of their loan.
3. Moratorium.
We will achieve the extension of the eviction moratorium, the suspension of the eviction of foreign currency borrowers in trouble until the problem is resolved,
in addition to the fact that we do not offer protection to arbitrary tenants.
We regard legal, fair and bona fide housing as a fundamental human right.
4. Personal bankruptcy.
The institution of private bankruptcy can be a solution for those who have not yet become completely insolvent.
In appropriate cases, they could ask the court or the municipalities to declare their insolvency in a decision.
After that, a family helper with a degree in law would be assigned to those in trouble, who would support families in difficult situations to get back on their feet, similar to the free legal aid services.
In this spirit, you can mediate on behalf of debtors in the direction of banks,
and can connect them with the labor market, retraining programs,
but under no circumstances would he share the family expenses.
5. Partial repayment.
In addition to final repayment, we advocate the option of partial repayment to help foreign currency borrowers in trouble.
Thus, those who cannot live with the current final payment still have the opportunity to reduce their interest charges and installments.
6. Extension.
We would also extend our solution proposals to Hungarian small and medium-sized enterprises,
and for car borrowers who help their family or business with their vehicle,
for borrowers with free use (those who used the borrowed amount for home renovation or purchase)
and also for victims of abuses by utility companies.
7. Occupancy.
For many people, the sale of abandoned houses and lots in the country for one HUF to foreign currency borrowers could be a solution.
With the involvement of local governments, life could be breathed into abandoned parts of the country through comprehensive economic revitalization programs and with the help of family support services.
At the same time, these regions would receive special attention during the grouping of tender and development funds.
8. Bank penalty.
It is a legitimate demand that the operating license of banks that continuously abuse consumer trust can be suspended.
In the spirit of the above, the banks must therefore undertake the settlement at the expense of their unjustified extra profit.
9. Protection.
Regarding the future, we consider it essential to stop the excesses of the executors,
in the spirit of this, we would maximize executive commissions at two percent,
and we would bring the entire executive branch under state control.
10. Rationing.
We would guarantee by law that no one could exceed the reasonable upper limit of debts, in other words, we would make it impossible for a 10 million apartment to accumulate a debt of 26 million, and then have to repay that amount.
According to this, the amount of the total debt cannot be significantly greater than the value of the object offered as a mortgage.
2.3 Population turnover
2.3.1 We tell the truth!
The most serious problem facing Hungarians is population decline.
The situation is tragic and life-threatening in many ways.
On the one hand, the fundamental problem is the negative balance between births and deaths, i.e. natural weight loss.
The other problem is aging, which is closely linked to it, and the associated economic and social security problems.
The next problem is the social emigration experienced in the last few years, that is, the mass emigration and settlement abroad of active Hungarian young people who want to work.
Then there is the amazingly bad physical and mental state of Hungarian society that tops it all.
This is compounded by internal demographic migration, i.e. the depopulation and impossibility of villages.
Finally, in this already fatal situation, the population explosion of the part of the Gypsies unable to integrate comes to this.
Jobbik treats the issue of population problems and emigration as interrelated phenomena,
and he clearly sees to what extent the deterioration of the background processes of one area also damages the future improvement chances of the other area.
The basis of our program is that although financial recognition is particularly important,
yet it forms only one branch of the multifactorial field of demography.
An unfortunate example of this is that although the so-called Tens of billions remained with Hungarian families thanks to family tax benefits, and the number of children born has continued to decrease in recent years.
Solving the population crisis is therefore a complex task that requires full government concentration, harmonious cooperation between ministries,
it requires the support of the media, civil society and society at the same time.
We solve it in 10 steps!
1. VAT reduction.
The future Jobbik government will reduce the VAT on items necessary for raising children,
namely to a radical extent.
This is a relatively safe method of child protection that, instead of direct payments and social transfers, makes it easier for items that actually go to the descendants.
2. Creating a home.
Perhaps as the most important point (and in a way that can also be used in the fight against the emigration of young people), Jobbik has developed a state-supported home and rental housing construction and purchase program.
Since one of the main reasons for leaving the country was the near-impossibility of getting one's own home,
a system in which strictly Hungarian contractors and suppliers would participate in the construction of new rental apartments would have a revolutionary effect.
The same is true if the state buys vacant, abandoned homes for rental purposes,
and renovating it with Hungarian entrepreneurs.
After a moving-in family can rent a new apartment or an apartment of a size suitable for the first child for a fraction of the market price for a few years,
in the end, you could buy your living space around cost, with a fully subsidized loan, supervised by the state.
3. Food supply.
Within the framework of a family supply service, we would deliver healthy Hungarian food (mainly basic foods, vegetables, fruits) to Hungarian families without intermediary and price-increasing companies, in an organized form,
expanded with the possibility of ordering on the world wide web,
saving thousands of forints on a monthly basis for everyone involved.
4. Social card.
With the introduction of the social card at the national level, we would achieve that the money intended for them really reaches the children, and is not used for the parents' needs or passions that do not affect child rearing.
Only Hungarian products could be purchased in the social store network,
with which we would thereby expand the market opportunities of Hungarian businesses and industry,
thus creating jobs.
5. Family planning.
We would transform the system of family allowance, curbing subsistence childbearing
and supporting responsible family planning.
The allowance system is being reformed in such a way that it would only be paid to the parent from the age of 18,
after the 3rd child only in the form of a tax discount.
Those families raising children who receive social support receive both the aid and the family allowance by transferring it to a social card.
We will make the family support system inflation-tracking, similar to the pension system.
6. Mother-friendly workplaces,
kindergarten and nursery places.
Improving the situation of mothers and creating flexible workplaces for them can only be imagined with central assistance,
and we would also eliminate the unsustainable situation, according to which two to four times more mothers can work part-time in average European countries than in our country.
Since this is also true for neighboring countries, this question cannot be made dependent on economic development alone.
In the public sector, it will be mandatory to offer flexible, part-time employment to state employees raising children.
In the future, we will extend this to the competitive sector as well.
We will improve the unsustainable shortage of nursery and kindergarten places.
In order to ensure that young people studying in higher education do not have to choose between studying and having children, we are creating a family-friendly higher education service with shared dormitory accommodation,
child benefits,
nurseries or especially by creating a baby room within the institution.
We are creating a multi-shift crèche system for employees,
by ensuring that nurseries are open according to demand - according to working hours.
7. Fetal protection.
We are creating a fetal protection law that is acceptable both from the point of view of medical and Christian ethics.
At the same time, we are launching a social program to explore the causes of abortions in our country, which are well above the international average,
to effectively prevent and reduce their number,
to help and support mothers and future mothers.
8. Bottle baby program.
Infertility is a national disease, so we would use special resources to support the fight of those determined young people who would like to have a child despite the difficulties and possible health obstacles.
As a result, thousands more children can be born every year.
9. Land program.
With a population land program, we would aim to repopulate our four regions, which, although they are among the most underdeveloped regions of the EU, are suitable for the continuation of prudent rural lifestyles and farming thanks to their unique natural features.
According to the essence of our proposal package, interested young people would be able to get land in the countryside,
where they would undertake to give birth to two or three children in return for a lease
– and for this they can receive external help in countless forms, from the nurse to the ranger
to facilitating access to local markets.
We support so that as many Hungarian families as possible can get a house at the price of one forint in a region where abandoned farms can be found en masse, which will slowly become the property of the few.
Of course, by channeling the necessary economic development resources here
and by guaranteeing public safety, it can be achieved so that many of our compatriots who yearn for big cities can start a new life.
10. Parental annuity.
The basic idea of ​​this is to make having and raising children a pension-earning activity,
that is, a certain percentage of the income tax of adult and working children is transferred directly to supplement their parents' pensions.
However, because precisely because of the family tax benefits - which the future Jobbik government will keep -
the personal income tax paid by breadwinners raising children is reduced, it is necessary to clarify that this is not the paid tax liability, but a specific part of the tax liability calculated without discounts.
This system must also be guaranteed in the Basic Law,
in other words, we should not only help the current retirees, but also encourage today's couples and today's young people to have and raise children responsibly, which is the surest source of self-care in their old years.
The parental support annuity can emphatically support the pension of the working child's parents, by directly transferring their own tax payments.
2.4 Sustainable overhead reduction
2.4.1 We tell the truth!
The crime of the MSZP-SZDSZ governments is the sale of strategic sectors to foreigners.
In the developed countries of Europe, utility companies are considered to be of strategic importance,
therefore, they are considered national (most often community) property.
However, the MSZP-SZDSZ government formed under the leadership of Gyula Horn sold the national assets well below the realistic price,
and brought a significant part of our strategic energy companies into the hands of foreigners.
It clearly shows the perversity of the privatization of Hungarian utility companies that, while the socialist and free-democrat politicians convinced the Hungarian people that the state could not be a good owner of these companies, German and French companies that were (partly) owned by the state played the main role in the purchase of Hungarian companies. .
The conditions for the privatization of Hungarian utilities amounted to treason:
during the privatization of energy companies, the left-wing government provided foreigners with guaranteed profits.
The profit guaranteed by the government for foreign companies was ensured by price increases affecting the Hungarian people.
During the 8 years of the MSZP-SZDSZ government, the utility costs of the Hungarian people increased several times,
the cost of natural gas, electricity, residential water and sewerage fees, and waste transportation also increased significantly.
Right after the establishment of the 2010 parliament, Jobbik raised the review of the socialists' treasonous privatization to the parliamentary level
and proved it with professional arguments and statistical data: the Hungarian people pay the highest utility bills in Europe, which must be reduced immediately.
The reduction was also covered: the luxury profits provided by the MSZP-SZDSZ governments to foreign companies must be abolished,
and the price reduction achieved in this way leads to a significant reduction in utility bills of Hungarian people.
However, it took more than three years to start the overhead reduction,
since the Fidesz government reserved the utility reduction for political gain for the period approaching the campaign.
The Orbán government's measure, which was communicated as the biggest governmental success, was the start of the utilities reduction program.
The announced utility reduction program affected the areas of electricity production and service, natural gas service, district heating service, chimney sweeping, residential water and sewer service, and municipal waste transportation.
However, the Fidesz utility reduction program is ill-considered
and professionally undeveloped,
therefore - even though it temporarily reduced the population's burdens -
it was realized in an economically self-destructive, unsustainable way.
The Orbán government was satisfied with cutting the prices of utility providers,
by taxing utility companies,
but not about the modernization of the outdated domestic utility systems, which are often several decades behind,
nor about saving the existing ones,
nor did it take care of building the necessary new capacities.
Due to the unpredictable energy policy affecting Hungarian producers, four Hungarian power plants were closed within a year.
thousands of workers unemployed
and subsidized by taxpayers' money.
As a result of short-term measures based on political gain, the share of imported electricity has increased continuously in recent years,
and during the summer peak periods, we bought more than half(!) of the electricity we used from abroad.
The utility reduction program implemented by the Orbán government – ​​in contrast to official government communication – is largely not by cutting the unjustified profits of foreign companies,
but it was realized with Hungarian taxpayers' money.
The Orbán government already provided HUF 52 billion in compensation to district heating companies in January of last year,
which is increased by a similar amount in winter.
Thus - since the state can only operate with the money it collects from taxpayers - it can be said that the price of the Fidesz utility reduction is paid by the Hungarian people in other, increased taxes.
The future Jobbik government will be realized in a sustainable and environmentally friendly way
as a result of its utility reduction program, the utility costs of Hungarian people will be reduced sustainably.
After the 30% reduction proposed by Jobbik was realized in the case of electricity, water and gas,
the overhead reduction is extended to firewood (by reducing the VAT to 5%),
for fuels (by reducing the excise duty)
and also to the Internet (by re-regulating the pricing practice).
An increase in the value of residential properties is expected due to the realized energy efficiency investments,
the quality of life of people living in modernized residential properties improves.
By reducing energy consumption, we can do a lot to protect the environment.
The Hungarian foreign trade balance is improving due to the decreasing energy demand.
The country's self-sustainability
and security of supply improves.
We encourage job creation in the construction and energy sectors.
We will stimulate the economy by creating tens of thousands of jobs in the construction industry and strengthening domestic production.
We strengthen innovation in the field of energy efficiency.
We prevent the deterioration of the supply infrastructure,
and we ensure its sustainable development and modernization.
We solve it in 10 steps!
1. Maintenance.
The goal of the future Jobbik government is to maintain the previous results of the overhead reduction,
since a significant reduction in utility costs for Hungarian people is in the national interest.
2. Correction.
In addition to maintaining the results of the utility reduction program started by the Orbán government, it needs to be corrected on several points due to its shortcomings.
Jobbik has developed a detailed, professional program on the measures necessary to reduce overheads in a sustainable, environmentally friendly manner.
3. Declaration.
Electricity production and service, natural gas service, district heating service, chimney sweep, residential water and sewer service, municipal waste transport and treatment (abbreviated: public utilities) must be declared of strategic importance.
4. Redemption.
It is necessary to take care of the community ownership and repurchase of the economic companies operating in these areas.
5. Non-profit.
Business associations operating in the fields of electricity generation and supply, natural gas supply, district heating services, chimney sweeps, residential water and sewer services, and municipal waste transport must be required to operate on a non-profit basis.
6. Competitiveness.
Due to their strategic importance, the operating conditions (headcount ratios, leave) typical of Western European companies of similar plant size must be established in order to ensure competitive prices.
7. Development.
By developing capacities as needed
and its modernization must ensure the sustainability of overhead reduction at community-owned utilities.
8. Import reduction.
A 5-year action plan must be implemented in order to reduce the share of imported electricity to zero in domestic electricity consumption.
9. Fund.
In order to cover the investment needs of the overhead reduction program and to start the program, an Overhead Reduction Fund with a capital of HUF 200 billion must be established using the state budget, funds provided by the European Union, and revenues from the European Union's carbon dioxide emission trading system.
10. Energy efficiency.
Energy efficiency investments implemented with the help of the utility reduction fund (insulation of buildings, replacement of doors and windows, modernization of building machinery) must be available for all domestic residential properties.
The overhead reduction program is partly financed by the Overhead Reduction Fund and partly by the savings available as a result of energy efficiency investments.
2.5 Hungarian-Gypsy coexistence
2.5.1 We tell the truth!
Hungarian-Gypsy coexistence has been a taboo issue for the past 20-24 years.
Trouble was swept under the rug,
there were more and more local conflicts, suppressed, untreated anger, and accumulating aggression.
The appearance of the Magyar Gárda and Jobbik, followed by the party's success in the parliament, pulled the rug from the hidden reality.
From then on, the barriers were broken, and the gypsy problem, which until then had only been mentioned in whispers, became public talk.
However, the situation is still incredibly bad today,
since, with the exception of Jobbik, all the other parties are in the "politically correct" field of communication,
and from this it follows directly that there is almost no chance of real actions with them.
Looking back from the perspective of 24 years, all the governments have an amazing responsibility, since the matter was considered closed with the purchase of a few political "decorative gypsies" and the hospitality of the people of Putri every four years.
Once in government, Jobbik will honestly, fairly, but firmly tackle the problem,
and we predict that neither the locust army of various human rights organizations, nor the deceitfulness of the other parties, nor the fury of the international liberal background power will prevent us from doing so.
Our conscience and our intentions are pure.
We want to live together with the Hungarian Gypsies under normal, orderly, strict, fair and clear conditions.
Let those who have something to fear be afraid.
In any case, it must be clarified that Jobbik has not had and will not have a single proposal that would discriminate between Hungarian citizens on the basis of race.
In other words, the Gypsies do not have to fear that they will face discrimination under the future Jobbik government.
What awaits them is the exact opposite: completely equal conditions.
Where they also have to do something for their happiness,
because, in our opinion, the majority Hungarian society has already done a lot financially, politically, economically and culturally.
Now it's their turn.
So we can safely say: it will be better for honest Gypsy people under Jobbik.
But no longer because they are gypsies, but because they are decent.
And vice versa: it will be worse for the dishonest, be it Gypsy or Hungarian.
This is one of our basic philosophies, and we build our program related to Hungarian-Gypsy coexistence on it.
We solve it in 10 steps!
1. Diagnosis.
The very first step is to establish a correct and accurate diagnosis of the situation of Gypsies.
They are taboo about the number of souls, their physical, material, spiritual and spiritual condition and without embellishing the reality.
Hard but important questions must be asked, such as, for example, do you want to integrate at all - that is, obey the law, raise your child, work, etc.?
2. Dispute.
It is necessary to create the possibility of a real, constructive discussion free from emotional overheat, the media and the civil sphere,
as well as the necessary self-restraint and helpfulness of Gypsy organizations and leaders.
Everyone must understand that our goal is not to belittle each other, but to find a solution.
We consider it necessary to present the Gypsy issue as an international, European problem on the EU and other world political arenas.
3. Non-discrimination.
We will eliminate race-based positive discrimination.
Hungarian Gypsies must grow up to the point where they understand that nothing comes of it because someone is a Gypsy.
Nor is it because he is Hungarian.
You get something if you fulfill the necessary conditions, obligations,
if you are willing to make efforts for integration.
This is actually the essence of the Árpatak model, which divides people not into Hungarians and Gypsies, but into builders and destroyers.
4. Thrift.
We are putting an end to hundreds of billions worth of development subsidies,
90% of which did not reach the target persons, but disappeared in the hands of all kinds of foundations, gypsy organizations and rights defenders.
We will only provide money for any catch-up project under the strictest conditions and with the most serious efficiency control.
5. Leaders.
Among the leaders of Gypsy public life, we filter out swindlers, criminals and gypsies who make a living.
We are creating conditions through which a new leadership layer can emerge for the Gypsies, who regard Hungary as their homeland,
which strives for fraternal relations with Hungary,
and which is capable of dialogue and negotiation in solving the conflicts of Hungarian-Gypsy coexistence.
6. Public safety.
Existing gypsy crime must be eradicated, so we will strengthen the police,
we set up the gendarmerie,
and we support social self-defense organizations operating within legal frameworks.
We use strict sanctions to eradicate crimes against the elderly, women and children,
as well as violence at school and against a person performing a public duty.
The unsustainable process that the deviant part of the Gypsies, after receiving the aid produced by the majority society, starts to terrorize the majority society that finances their livelihood must be put an end to.
7. Social card.
We will stop subsistence childbearing, during which parents bring a child into the world for various benefits, but no longer care about its upbringing, and all its burdens - material, spiritual, professional and criminological - are placed on society.
From the 3rd child onwards, the family allowance is converted into a tax discount,
and the various benefits in the social store network
it is paid on a social card that can be used to buy basic Hungarian products.
8. Boarding.
Jobbik does not take either position on the falsely posed segregation-integration issue.
We believe that there are times when one is the right solution, and there are times when the other is the right solution.
We are creating a state boarding school network for Gypsy children who are struggling with integration,
with which we create a chance to throw off the chain of antisociality as a family heritage.
The source is from the amount of the family support allowance of those concerned,
and we would cover it from the normative state contribution of dormitory education and care.
We would also involve the churches in the maintenance and operation.
9. Work.
We implement the "work instead of aid" principle.
Thanks to the job creation results of our Seven Leaders plan, the typical self-excuse that "I would work, but there is nowhere" will no longer be tenable.
People who are able to work but do not want to work are deprived of all kinds of social benefits.
10. Liability.
We will put an end to the buying of Gypsy votes.
Anyone who either sells their vote or buys the votes of others will be subject to the most severe sanctions.
In contrast to universal suffrage, we are introducing a qualification census,
according to which we withdraw the right to vote from those who have not completed their basic education.
2.6 Debt service
2.6.1 We tell the truth!
Among the issues of fate that need to be urgently addressed - land protection, ending the foreign exchange crisis, population turnover, sustainable utility costs, Hungarian-Gypsy coexistence - the sixth is the question of renegotiating the national debt.
Since its foundation, Jobbik has claimed that the repayment of the Hungarian national debt is impossible,
and it is not possible to build a Hungarian economy with such a burden.
We have three admirable and admirable reasons for starting the renegotiation.
On the one hand, we inherited the entire debt spiral from communism, i.e. from a dictatorship,
so we have every moral basis to ask for some kind of relief.
On the other hand, unlike other countries, Hungary has been a good debtor in recent decades,
that is, he proved that he does not want to avoid repayment, but wants to get rid of it by paying.
A good debtor is usually valued during the creditor practice,
and if he is in trouble, they usually give him relief.
Finally, it can be economically proven that the Hungarian economy is unable to pay off this debt in the long term,
since it cannot develop its economy precisely because of its lack of resources,
that is, sooner or later, given the current trends, it will become insolvent.
This should not be in the interest of the creditors either.
So we have a moral, a customary law and a rational economic reason.
The time has come to have a government that dares to undertake the inevitable debt settlement sooner or later.
Taking the steps of debt relief detailed in the next point together - depending on the scheme used - can result in annual savings of HUF 500-700 billion.
We solve it in 10 steps!
1. Renegotiation based on successful international practices.
Regarding the concrete solution to the problem of the national debt, the future Jobbik government will follow the path of negotiations followed in recent years by Ireland, Portugal or Spain, and previously by Argentina or Serbia-Montenegro.
2. Identification of key actors.
In addition to the governments of the countries participating in lending, we identify the largest private creditors and their possible organizations, such as the International Institute of Finance (IIF), which is the umbrella organization of private banks.
3. Negotiation with the key players.
We would involve all relevant parties in the negotiations: governments and the largest creditors directly, smaller private creditors through the IIF
4. Involvement of new actors in the circle of creditors.
In the spirit of the Eastern turn, we are convincing countries and their banks to provide funds for Hungary, which provide more favorable terms than the current lenders.
5. Involvement of actors skilled in appropriate negotiation techniques.
Debt settlement presupposes such professional and business competences, skills and experience that there is only a very small chance of being found in the state administration alone.
That's why we entrust the negotiations to actors who, under the supervision of the state representatives present, can use hard and effective negotiation techniques to persuade the other party to cooperate.
6. Making creditors' representatives interested.
We will convince the creditors: it is better to write off a part of the loans as a loss now, than to lose a much larger part later in the event of a partial state bankruptcy.
A sustainable level of debt service is also in the interest of creditors pursuing a prudent policy.
7. Agreement on the acceptable amount of the debt burden.
We determine with macroeconomic calculations and impact assessment,
then we will discuss with the representatives of the creditors what is the level of indebtedness in the case of Hungary, at which a sustainable economic growth can be achieved.
8. Agreement on the amount of release.
We convince the creditors that the debt beyond the sustainable level is written off as a one-time loss, to be released.
Since at that time they provided a loan with a risk premium that included the risk of this, their real loss will be significantly smaller than the amount of the waiver.
9. Agreement to ease conditions.
In the case of the remaining stock, we will agree on conditions regarding interest rates, maturity and grace period, which will enable the Hungarian economy to be on a growth path,
at the same time, the availability of loans.
10. Credit exchange for the remaining stock.
After we convinced most of the participants in lending of the need for partial remission and further relief,
the remaining bad loans will be replaced with loans from the newly involved actors offered on a market basis, but on more favorable terms than the current ones.
3. Sectoral programs
3.1 Economic program
3.1.1 From bucket to bucket, from bucket to bucket
In Hungary, during the regime change, each party largely served the promotion of external interests.
Whichever opposition party had won the 1990 elections, there would have been no fundamental difference in the economic policy followed by the new government.
Hungary's economy has been in a continuous crisis ever since,
which sometimes resulted in a situation bordering on state bankruptcy (1995, 2008).
The main cause of the ongoing economic crisis was the fundamentally flawed economic policy,
at the center of which - from the SZDSZ to Fidesz to the MSZP - were the same elements.
One such element was the favoring of foreign economic and financial interests and foreign companies over domestic national economic interests and domestic enterprises (privatization, tax policy, direct state subsidies, interest rate policy),
the result of which was a divided country, in which multinationals are strong, but domestic entrepreneurs and SMEs can only struggle.
The national debt was treated as a "sacred cow",
in addition to the complete rejection of renegotiation, negotiation of financing on more favorable terms (even raising the issue).
The neoliberal approach became exclusive,
which repressed state ownership to the extreme,
regulatory, control and sanctioning functions.
The long-term national strategy
and the economic policy implemented along these lines, spanning parliamentary cycles, consistent and with a decidedly national orientation, was completely absent.
As a result of all this, the real income of the Hungarian population - in stark contrast to other countries in the region that experienced socialist dictatorship - practically did not rise during 22 years.
The middle class is on the verge of disappearing,
impoverishment, hopelessness, disillusionment and jaded resignation became widespread.
Corruption has reached astonishing proportions,
as a result of which 20-25% of the total amount disappears into private pockets during the spending of public funds - even according to conservative estimates.
The most important objectives of the system change: fair politics,
asserting Hungarian interests,
the free market economy,
the rule of law,
European integration have now become empty slogans for the majority of people.
The MSZP-SZDSZ government that began in 2002 continued the worst traditions of the failed economic policy of the regime change.
They didn't have any meaningful ideas about the blatantly low employment across Europe.
The national debt, whose value in relation to GDP began to decrease under the first Orbán government, increased from 53% to close to 80%.
They let the colonialist banks on the financial level prey on unsuspecting Hungarian citizens,
then the big domestic banks also realized that the government policy opened the way for the latest dangerous banking operations.
Together, they tricked the majority of those involved into the trap of foreign currency loans.
Household loans tripled between 2004 and 2008,
And at the end of 2008, the amount of loans extended was already 30% larger than that of deposits in banks.
Rural Hungary continued to struggle in the trap of the failed regime change,
which the EU accession only worsened.
The tax system was hectic, unpredictable and unreasonable,
which, despite the significant burdens, could not cover the budget.
Despite loud voices, the situation of small and medium-sized enterprises has not been improved,
the dual structure of the economy remained.
Multinational companies were able to take their profits out of the country undisturbed,
while they regularly abused their dominance over domestic companies.
The national bank has pursued a disastrous monetary policy since the regime change, keeping the base interest rate extremely high,
which destroyed the Hungarian medium and small business sector,
and burdened the economy and society as a continuous money pump.
The second Orbán government, which came to power in 2010 with a two-thirds majority, was unable to achieve a meaningful turnaround even with the extraordinary degree of authorization.
Economic growth has stopped,
in fact, in 2012 there was a large decline.
By 2013, there was a moderate improvement,
but the modest growth is still fueled by the exports of multinational companies,
in addition to the further recession of the domestic economy.
We have no better prospects for 2014 either.
Domestic consumption continues to stagnate.
The volume of investments has decreased in every quarter since the third quarter of 2010,
its volume fell to the level of 2000.
The promised job creation did not materialize.
If there is growth, there is an increase in public employment
and it is explained by the statistical count of those who have found work abroad.
The public debt continued to increase in absolute terms
despite the issuance of HUF 1,400 billion bonds following the nationalization of private pension funds.
Between April 2010 and December 2013, the debt of the central budget increased from HUF 19,328 billion to HUF 21,998 billion, i.e. compared to April 2010, it increased by HUF 2,675 billion (13.8%).
the ratio to GDP fluctuates around 80%.
All this is in spectacular contrast to the development seen in other countries of the region,
that is, it is not true that the Hungarian failure is a consequence of the European and global situation.
The plan to increase employment (which was one of the two most important objectives of the government) failed.
As many new jobs are created on one side, at least the same number disappear on the other side.
Hungary has the worst employment indicators in the EU,
and there doesn't seem to be any chance of improvement.
The improvement in employment statistics is due to the expansion of public work programs,
but even this is only due to the generous statistical enumeration.
Even according to the government's own forecast, the vision of "1 million new jobs" previously announced for 4 years, then quickly modified, and now for 10 years, is completely unrealistic -
for the 2010-2014 cycle, they count on a maximum of 200-300 thousand, mostly from public works.
In addition to creating jobs, settling the issue of the national debt was another important objective of Fidesz, with which they failed in the same way.
The national debt expressed in forints increased instead of decreasing.
Only the interest burden, which is HUF 1,300-1,400 billion, is over 4% of the annual GDP.
The latter number also means that in order to keep the general government deficit under 3%, a primary government surplus of 1% or more must be achieved,
that is, one austerity must be implemented after another, bleeding the country and eliminating the chance of economic recovery.
Partly thanks to Jobbik's attention-grabbing campaign of half a million signatures, the government promised to save foreign currency borrowers in 2010.
Despite this, the proportion of residential mortgage loans for which installments are paid late continued to increase.
The National Asset Manager was only able to help a few,
just as the housing estate in Ócs can only offer a solution to a few people - realized at a very high price.
Prepayment linked to exchange rate fixing helped only the wealthier,
others were forced to take HUF loans.
And the exchange rate barrier only means a breath of relief,
and in addition to postponing the payment obligation, in several cases it extracts an agreement from the injured party, which makes it more difficult to challenge the original, abusive contract later on.
In the tax system, the Orbán government proposed simplification and reduction, including the abolition of "trivial taxes".
He did this
but in a short time he introduced even more "small taxes".
The personal income tax, which became a single rate, meant an improvement for the few, at the expense of the masses who were worse off.
In the interest of rural Hungary, no successful policy of its own was implemented either,
the EU opportunities were not used either.
Although supporting small and medium-sized businesses would even be considered a "Euro-compliant" solution,
the government put the oligarchs close to them in the position instead.
And although it apparently raised serious barriers to foreign property acquisition, it left plenty of loopholes.
Improving the situation of small and medium-sized enterprises in other sectors also remained only rhetoric:
their loss of space continued, and the dual structure of the economy was not changed even to a small extent.
The main beneficiaries are still multinational companies,
even with the special taxes levied on individual sectors.
The only progress was made in the area of ​​monetary policy, where it was possible to significantly reduce the base interest rate in several stages,
and the MNB also implemented a program providing cheap loans.
At the same time, it was not possible to force the banks to adopt entrepreneurial and citizen-friendly lending practices.
3.1.2 Forward from Cseber
The model of global capitalism based on the free movement of multinational capital has failed.
Billions of people were physically and mentally miserable,
the social gap in the world continued to grow.
The crisis in Hungary had an even more devastating effect, because for a quarter of a century now, global processes have been complemented by an anti-national
and also with the harmful activities of corrupt political leaders.
In the future, instead of global capitalism, more and more tasks in the planning and management of food production, trade, public safety, energy supply and other areas will fall to local organizations.
According to Jobbik, an eco-social national economy is needed in Hungary.
The economy is an environment worthy of man (eco-),
decent life (social)
and for the sake of Hungarianness (nation) it must be subjected to reasonable and effective limits.
Not in order to curb economic development,
but to protect the economy and, consequently, society from collapse.
Jobbik professes the future vision of a strong and rich Hungary, a rising nation,
which requires a strong and actively entrepreneurial state presence.
The state can be the economic force that can block multinational, globalizing efforts,
abuse of dominance,
which is able to support and place domestic economic actors on equal terms of competition,
which can create fair conditions in social redistribution,
and which is capable of creating a forward-looking strategy for the entire nation.
At the same time, strengthening the role cannot be equated with an overgrowth of government power.
The borders of the national interest,
social welfare
and is designated by economic efficiency.
The economic policy must fit the national strategic goals:
it must protect and recreate Hungarian industry, Hungarian producers, Hungarian trade, Hungarian goods and Hungarian markets.
The state must preserve strategic national assets, land, water, mineral resources, forests,
and, in justified cases, it must recover the national wealth that has already been squandered.
So that the state can actually perform its role of active economic revitalization, possessing and using the comparative advantages of the country and the nation.
The focus of Jobbik's economic policy is job creation.
Based on the diligence of the Hungarian people, it is necessary for politics to restore the honor of work, both financially and morally.
and create an economic and tax climate that encourages and supports job creation.
As described in the Seven Leaders Plan, our basic economic political goal is the creation of jobs that provide a decent living,
therefore, the breaking points of the national economy are agriculture and the food industry based on it,
the much better use of our mineral resources and energy reserves than before,
strategic water management,
the widest possible application of information communication technologies,
research and development and innovation,
the construction industry,
the logistics industry
and we hold health tourism.
The backbone of our economy is the – largely Hungarian-owned – small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) sector.
They play a significant role in strengthening our national economy, contributing to job creation, innovation and exports.
In Hungary, SMEs currently provide a living for nearly 70% of the workforce.
At the national economic level, the added value of the sector is approximately 50% in GDP,
giving 20% ​​of the export performance.
The first step in setting yourself on a growth path is to initiate the prosperity of the domestic SME sector with efficient resource allocation
and regulatory environment.
In recent years, the order book, profitability, production level and global business situation of SMEs have continuously deteriorated.
The government does not give the sector adequate priority,
he left them alone even during the crisis period.
The support system is opaque and bureaucratic.
It is necessary to clean up the profile of the taxation system and make it predictable,
since businesses have to deal with nearly 50 types of taxes,
which continues to increase the employment rate of the black workforce.
The war of circular debt and unpaid bills is taking on irrational proportions in Hungary.
Another problem is the underfunding of businesses:
In Hungary, companies can obtain approximately 20% of external funding, the remaining 80% must be raised from internal sources,
while this ratio is exactly the opposite in Western countries.
Due to unfavorable regulations, more and more companies are moving their operations to neighboring countries,
which entails serious downsizing, a drop in GDP, and a loss of tax revenue.
Our economy has a dual structure, in which the presence of multinational companies is extremely strong and highly supported by the government,
which often abuse their dominance over smaller suppliers, often setting unfulfillable conditions.
The number of SMEs in our country is also decreasing due to their aggressive growth and expansion business policy.
Jobbik will enter into strategic contracts with the Hungarian business community.
And the strategic contracts concluded with multis are modified so that their commitments include the gradual catch-up of wages to the EU average,
and increasing the proportion of Hungarian suppliers.
Due to the dual structure of the economy, the GNI, which shows the gross national income, lags behind the gross domestic product, the GDP, by an annual average of around 5 percent.
The GNI is obtained by deducting the generated income from the GDP, which falls proportionately on foreign-owned companies or, in the case of mixed ownership, on foreign owners.
Foreign owners typically take this 5 percent of GDP out of the country,
but at least they can make a decision in this direction at any time, which increases the country's economic vulnerability and deprivation.
Today, analyzes by mainstream international organizations and financial institutions also show that the Hungarian public debt is on an unsustainable path.
Recovery is not possible without a radically new approach to the issue,
bankruptcy will inevitably occur sooner or later.
Significant debt relief is needed, which can take many different forms: term extension, payment moratorium for a few years, interest reduction, reduction of principal debt.
Currently, all European countries concerned are constantly renegotiating their own national debt, except for the Hungarian governments.
As EU members, we must insist that what is given to all member countries in trouble, we will also receive.
One of these rights is access to loans with affordable, financeable interest rates,
and the reduction of interest charges to a tolerable level,
with which it is possible to ensure that the economy of the given country does not suffocate and gets back on a healthy track.
If the Portuguese, the Spanish, the Irish, the Greeks, and the Cypriots can do this, then Hungary must too.
In stark contrast to the statements that portray the multis in an unreasonably favorable light, the facts show that in the period from the regime change to the present, the balance of capital entering and withdrawing from Hungary is negative (!) even without loans and loan interest.
Our country has also been a net financier of foreign countries in the last 22-23 years,
and this does not even include the massively negative balance of loans and loan interest.
In addition to all of this, Multik's activities in Hungary also caused a number of other collateral damages:
domestic industries with long traditions have completely ceased to exist,
the operation of the majority of SMEs became impossible,
jobs disappeared en masse under the guise of rationalization, cost efficiency, regional consolidation and other sounding slogans.
Jobbik will force the multis to play by the same rules of the game in Hungary as in their own country.
According to Jobbik, the management of the central bank must use all means of monetary easing so that there are no obstacles to the start of economic growth.
At the moment, the MNB does not take any action against the extremely harmful market behavior of Hungarian commercial banks, such as withdrawal of funds, which is outrageous even in regional comparisons, or the cessation of corporate lending, with virtually no means at its disposal.
The MNB must further increase banks' willingness to lend through verbal intervention,
by increasing lending capacity, with a low base interest rate,
based on the experience of the practice that started in 2013.
After the change of central bank president, the wrong practices of the past began to be changed,
but according to Jobbik, much more would be needed than so far.
Jobbik thinks in terms of Hungarian economic policy in the Carpathian basins, so it also considers Hungarian-inhabited areas beyond the border as part of the unified Hungarian economic zone to be created.
We want to orient our foreign economic relations towards the eastern economic region,
thereby reducing our country's dependence on the West,
promoting the stronger appearance of the Hungarian economy on the international market.
Jobbik's main economic policy goals have remained unchanged for years: sustainable,
measures based on national interests,
transparent and realistic budget planning,
an active state that helps domestic production and the prosperity of the Hungarian people,
value-creating work, greater appreciation of working people,
the harmony of economy and ecology,
and we want to achieve a corruption-free and clean public life.
3.1.3 What we end
ø Disruption of domestic industrial capacities.
We use all means to help the rebuilding of Hungarian industrial capacities, which were often deliberately and knowingly smashed and destroyed after 1990.
We will also strive to ensure that as much of the value chain as possible is owned by Hungarians.
The Hungarian public procurement market, which amounts to HUF 1,500 billion annually, could be the basis for the secure future of several Hungarian industries that are struggling with serious difficulties and a lack of orders.
ø The monopoly of multinational capital.
We will act with the utmost strictness against all unfair market behavior, be it deceiving consumers, eviscerating domestic suppliers, abuse of dominance, unilateral contract changes.
For this, the current legal environment must be transformed:
penalties must be drastically increased,
and the monitoring state organizations should be greatly strengthened.
We will prevent the multinationals from taking the profit out of the country with various tricks,
minimizing the tax paid in Hungary and removing themselves from the fair public burden.
The goal is not to chase the multis out of the country, but to eliminate the duality of the Hungarian economy,
and give domestic producers and manufacturers a chance to take their part in the operation of the economy to the same extent as in Western Europe.
ø Treating debt relief as a taboo.
With regard to the concrete solution to the problem of the national debt, Jobbik would follow the path of negotiation that the Irish, Portuguese and Spanish have also followed in recent years.
We would involve all relevant parties in the negotiations, from the most important governments to the umbrella organization of private banks (International Institute of Finance, IIF).
Debt relief - depending on the scheme used - can result in annual savings of HUF 500-700 billion.
ø Irresponsible indebtedness.
We would stipulate that new loans can only be taken out for developments that can be proven at the level of the national economy and, if possible, have a significant multiplier effect.
In order to do this, breaking with the previous erroneous and unprofessional practice, an expert examination based on an objective evaluation independent of the given institution will be mandatory before each loan.
We examine the return on large public investments in a complex manner, taking into account all external factors, taking into account the degree of aggregate contribution to the public good.
ø The foreign currency credit crisis.
As we have already described in the Questions of Destiny chapter, by converting foreign currency loans into forints, compensation, and the costs charged to the banks, we will eliminate the overall social crisis caused by the disbursement of foreign currency loans in a total of 11 steps.
ø The unfair tax system.
The flat tax system has failed.
Significant social damage
and the fact that the government admittedly renounced the effect of social justice through the tax system caused a further deterioration of the budget balance.
Since, according to the tax office's income statistics, the single-rate tax system caused a decrease in income for around 85% of employees,
the income scissors have opened up even more, and more and more people find themselves in difficult, often hopeless situations.
Jobbik is therefore restoring the multi-rate, multi-band personal income tax in the spirit of social justice.
In the lowest income bracket, the SJJA rate will be 12%,
and on top of that, we are creating a progressive system.
A load higher than the current 16% will enter at twice the average income.
We will keep the family tax benefits,
and we are expanding its range so that people with lower incomes can also use it.
In the framework of the extension, we create the possibility that low-income families can write off the tax relief not only from the personal income tax,
but can also be credited against other taxes.
VAT on basic foodstuffs will be reduced to 5%,
thereby helping the situation of families with lower than average incomes.
ø Overloading of special taxes on the public.
We will also retain and, as necessary, expand the sectoral special taxes,
to force large companies to participate in the public burden-bearing to an appropriate extent.
However, we will prevent these burdens from being passed on to the population,
because, based on current trends, the special taxes that the government proudly mentions also indirectly increase the restrictions on the population.
ø Offshoreing.
We banish offshore companies from public procurement and EU subsidies.
We will drastically reduce offshoring, using the experience of countries that have effectively acted against it in recent years.
We simplify the declaration system,
by whitening the economy, we widen the tax base,
also making sure that the authorities cannot punish honest entrepreneurs and companies unnecessarily.
For belonging.
As a first step, it is necessary to solve the isolation of those companies within the IT system of NAV, whose accumulated debt is already unmanageable.
These companies may no longer contract with others (their tax number will be suspended),
they cannot undertake further work until their debt is settled,
which stops the circular debt from spreading.
After comparing the invoices in the system, the debtors of the revolving debt will become visible,
and it will be possible to filter out those who had liquidity problems because they also did not receive the amount due to them according to the contract.
Additional chain debt can be solved by providing temporary liquidity for these companies,
which usually also affects the tax authorities, so most of the liquidity would be returned to the issuer.
As a result, many SMEs that became insolvent through no fault of their own - and through them Hungarian families - could be saved from liquidation.
3.1.4 And what we solve
√ Creation of at least half a million real jobs.
Improving employment based on a public works program is a flawed strategy.
With this, it is almost impossible to solve labor market and employment problems in the long term.
Jobbik's job creation ideas are based on the Seven Leaders Plan, which consists of the following pillars:
agriculture and industry related to agricultural activity;
strategic energy management;
exploitation of domestic mineral resources;
strategic water management;
homemaking;
health tourism;
info communication.
√ The return of emigrant Hungarian youth.
Through the implementation of the Seven Leaders Plan and Jobbik's program, we can bring home the approximately half a million Hungarian economic emigrants.
By making the continuation of studies available,
by solving housing problems
and above all, by creating decent workplaces, we can reunite Hungarian families separated for social reasons.
√ The production-oriented tax system.
We provide immediate and significant help to domestic small and medium-sized enterprises:
we impose an upper limit on the total tax for companies with a turnover of less than HUF 200 million,
we expand flat taxation,
Hungarian companies are preferred during public procurement.
We will expand personal income taxation with new elements that differentially support value-creating work.
We propose a change that supports the productive sector, high value-added economic activity and the maintenance of the national income in Hungary through significant tax benefits for employers.
√ SMEs' access to funds.
The resumption of bank lending must be achieved through a strong strengthening of the Hungarian banking system.
Foreign currency loans of SMEs will be convertible to HUF loans at the exchange rate at the time of admission.
The majority of the resulting costs will be borne by the banking sector.
In the transformation of the tax system, we pay special attention to SMEs:
reduce their burdens,
we simplify the declaration.
We will also strengthen access to credit for domestic SMEs by expanding the state guarantee system.
We will expand the issuance and distribution of Széchenyi cards,
while we will keep the 5% low rate of non-performing loans through the preliminary screening of borrowers by chambers of professional organizations.
We will multiply the resources available to the state capital investment fund,
and we want to significantly expand the scope of the fund's activities.
During public procurement, we will use all means to help strengthen the role of Hungarian SMEs.
We significantly reduce the administrative and bureaucratic barriers required for the use of EU tender funds,
and we provide grant writing support to the domestic SME sector.
√ State support for SMEs.
We will revive the state-owned KKV Bank from state resources, if necessary from central bank foreign exchange reserves and EU subsidies,
which, in contrast to the current practice, will not focus on the interests of foreign parent banks, but on the interests of domestic small and medium-sized enterprises.
KKV Bank's primary goal will be to provide low-cost loans - in combination, even with EU funds - for start-up and resource-demanding SMEs.
We are also setting up the National Factor Company, which can purchase the account receivables of the company in trouble as needed.
The debtor company must then fulfill the invoice claims on behalf of the National Factoring Company.
In addition to KKV Bank, we are establishing KKV Lízing, which will help partner companies finance assets in the framework of financial and operational leasing.
We are creating a state risk capital fund for start-up businesses so that innovative ideas are not implemented abroad.
Finally, we will set up the State Guarantee Framework, with which we will support access to external financing for SMEs,
providing a special role to companies performing innovative or development activities.
√ Promoting local economic cooperation.
Jobbik's settlement-farming development program is one of the foundations for fulfilling the Hungarian agricultural potential.
The point is that local actors (economic, civic, self-governing organizations) take control of their local economy by teaming up on a settlement or - in the case of scattered settlements - regional basis.
√ Further reduction of the basic interest rate.
We will continue the gradual but decisive reduction of the central bank base rate, reaching at least the regional average.
By reducing the base interest rate and using other means, the domestic banks must be forced to reduce the loan interest rates to at least the average level of the countries in the region,
and in general, fulfill the role that they should fulfill in a normally functioning market economy.
√ Making the national bank truly national.
The level of the MNB's foreign exchange reserves must be reduced from the current, excessively high level to an economically reasonable and justifiable level, thereby avoiding the annual unnecessary expenditure of several billion forints.
The interest paid on banks' mandatory central bank reserves must be abolished with immediate effect, in a similar way to other central banks, exempting taxpayers from an annual expenditure of HUF 30 billion.
It is necessary to achieve that the Hungarian central bank finally fulfills all its functions,
and not be exclusively a loyal servant of external interests.
At least as much as all national banks in the developed world.
It is also crucial that the MNB operates in the most transparent way possible,
the National Assembly exercises its rights of supervision and reporting as prescribed by law.
The Central Bank Act stipulates that the MNB, in addition to exchange rate stability, also prioritizes the aspect of employment expansion when planning and implementing its policy.
3.2 Employment policy program
3.2.1 Beyond the Abyss
The result of the cross-party government policy of the past twenty-four years is that unemployment in our country has been extremely high for years now,
and is noticeably increasing.
In a significant part of the existing workplaces, legal and health safety and accident protection are almost non-existent.
Not only the minimum wage,
but in most parts of the country, even the average wage does not reach the subsistence minimum per person.
It is impossible to build a future and start a family with such incomes.
In recent years, hundreds of thousands have fled abroad from complete unpredictability and insecurity,
and the process speeds up.
Black work took on enormous proportions,
due to the amount of taxes and contributions, the company that does everything legally and in accordance with the law is unable to compete and survive in the market.
The institutional system of social dialogue, employee and employer interest representations are unable to fulfill their function at any level of economic life.
Fewer and fewer companies and workers are carrying the country on their backs,
the number of the homeless is increasing.
Meanwhile, tens of billions were mostly spent on job-creating subsidies from multinational companies,
which had no demonstrable effect on employment.
The Hungarian small and medium-sized business sector is practically unable to access these subsidies,
thereby putting itself at another competitive disadvantage,
and losing more jobs.
The economic vulnerability of the Hungarian people is beyond the limit of tolerance, whether they are employers, employees or unemployed.
The task of the Hungarian employment policy is to ensure that Hungarian workplaces support the livelihood of Hungarian families in an adequate way, both in terms of quantity and quality.
and at the same time the development of the Hungarian economy.
3.2.2 The principles behind the employment policy program
Work has countless positive functions: to ensure the livelihood of the working person and his family,
to give dignity and meaning to everyday life,
to strengthen internal consumption and thus the national economy with the purchasing power of paid wages,
and to maintain large state subsystems such as the pension system, health care, education or public safety from tax revenues from work.
That is why our current slogan and future government philosophy: if there is work, there is everything,
if there is no work, there is nothing.
In today's world, which makes self-sufficiency impossible and creates complete economic vulnerability, in order to build a mentally and physically healthy society, it is more important than anything for the current government to ensure dignity and livelihood for those who are able and willing to work.
However, for all of this, it is also necessary for the government, through its economic policy, to create for employers the economic environment that creates opportunities for their own and their employees' livelihood.
If the state creates the real possibility of all this, then, but only then, it can rightly expect the implementation and observance of the rules.
Moreover, it is obliged to guarantee the legal, livelihood and workplace security of market participants with appropriate controls and, if necessary, sanctions.
Since Jobbik thinks in a work-based society,
thus, in the case of those able to work, the social network is primarily implemented through the world of work.
3.2.3 After twenty-four years
The crimes of the successive MSZP-SZDSZ and Fidesz-KDNP governments have systematically destroyed domestic employment across cycles.
One is in violation of tripartite agreements
implemented significant tax and contribution increases,
introduced super grossing,
increased the burden of fringe benefits,
widened the contribution base,
introduced the expected tax, the special tax and the interest tax.
The other not only broke the agreement,
but he also destroyed the very institution of the tripartite reconciliation of interests of employers-employees-government,
and by drastically raising the gross minimum wage, it put employers in an impossible situation.
The MSZP provides job-creating subsidies in the amount of about HUF 1,600 billion,
and most of the major state investments were given to foreign companies.
These are not domestic tax revenues,
but worker vulnerability, underpaid jobs,
third world working conditions were created in abundance.
And nearly doubling unemployment.
To this end, Fidesz, in a unique way in Europe, put the Labor Code at the service of employers,
smashed the system of early retirement, early retirement and service pensions,
and downgraded the institution of labor and occupational safety inspection.
In the public employment system, few people did nothing for more money than one,
on the other, many people do nothing for starvation wages, apart from increasing employment in statistical reports.
The MSZP helped foreign capital instead of Hungarian employers and employees,
and Fidesz, in its helplessness, smuggled public employment figures into the employment statistics.
The MSZP reduces the work of public sector workers by reducing wages,
by freezing their salary and salary base,
he "recognized" it by continuously reducing their fringe benefits.
Fidesz continued to cut wages and cafeterias in the sphere,
created total job insecurity as part of their political purges.
By jointly dismantling vocational training for twenty years, Hungary has now been made a country of trained workers.
Jobbik's women's policy
Jobbik considers men and women as equal people,
but all this does not mean a formality, the disappearance of differences determined by nature, the abandonment of gender roles.
Biological determination does not mean that a woman is only worth something in the household,
but we admit that their most beautiful profession is motherhood.
Women also take on a greater role in caring for the older members of the family,
thus, the state must recognize their additional activities (e.g. patient care at home instead of hospital care).
We will help parents raising children to create a division of labor within the family,
and we enable women to choose: return to work while raising children,
or fulfill their mission as a full-time mother (in this case, the mother must be insured even if the duration of the maternity leave has expired).
We support the return of women to work,
since this is demonstrably associated with higher fertility indicators.
We encourage employers in the private sector to create certified family-friendly workplaces,
which is an advantage for them in the case of state tenders.
This is based on: working time discount for children (increased for each child),
the flexible nature of the leave (even broken down into hours).
flexible working hours,
work from home,
shared (easily replaceable) jobs,
providing workplace childcare or childcare,
maintaining a continuous relationship with the workplace, even for those who are in or out of work
Since the higher participation of women in the labor market results in the birth of more children, it is essential to provide assistance to families with small children in raising children,
by increasing the number of nursery and kindergarten places,
by abolishing the nursery care fee introduced by the Fidesz government.
The home childcare system must be established, which could be requested from a state-municipal institution at a cheaper price than the market price.
Placement of the sibling nearby must be introduced as a new aspect for admission to public education institutions.
Research shows that population decline has been stopped or reversed where the state not only supports women in their role as childcare providers,
but also provides assistance in caring for the children during the day (so you don't have to give up so much because of the birth).
In order to promote conscious family planning, similar to smoking, we launch public health programs on starting a family, with particular regard to the dangers associated with postponing the birth of the first child,
and that is why we also emphasize the creation of family-friendly higher education.
3.2.4 What we end
ø The unfortunate state of temporary employment.
We are amending its rules in such a way that companies can use this employment legal instrument not for even more unscrupulous use of the workforce, but really only for more flexible management of labor demand.
We enforce equal treatment of hired labor with our own labor both in terms of wages, benefits and working conditions with strict sanctions.
The uncertainty surrounding the right to strike.
We are recreating the process of determining the minimum service that must be provided even in the event of a strike.
We also provide the right to strike in the field of public services,
to be able to use - but not abuse - this ultimate weapon of the world of work.
Strike breaking is sanctioned.
ø Injustices around the public works program.
We are introducing a full-time public work program differentiated according to qualifications for the long-term unemployed and the unemployed who are moving abroad in the world of work,
for which we create a public wage table.
The program includes customized training, catch-up,
real and professional job search help.
Anyone who does not perform work of the expected quality, does not go to work without a certificate, regularly and seriously violates the general social norms, and thereby hinders the work of others, will be excluded from the public work program for two months.
In the case of those performing physical public work, we employ labor inspectors, who will be obliged to observe the minimum work standards.
Anyone who does not undertake public work, or excludes himself through no fault of his own, will not be entitled to any social benefits.
ø Ethnic-based labor and employment subsidies,
and retrospectively subject to full control, regarding the manner, extent and effectiveness of the use of money.
ø Exaggerations of disability reviews.
The employment of hundreds of thousands of people of active age and able to work with altered work capacity is of national economic importance,
and can be fully solved from the current budget resources.
Those who are able to create salable products and value, their employment must be resolved within the framework of labor affairs,
those who do not because of their condition, their problem must be treated as a health and social issue.
Based on the complex reviews, a "mmk" employment support entitlement card must be issued, which the employer can validate during the monthly tax and contribution declaration.
The malpractices surrounding tenders promoting employment.
Among the applicants, the one who employs several people and/or for a longer period of time for a unit of funds has an advantage,
carries out an increase in staff,
produces Hungarian products from Hungarian raw materials.
We are simplifying and clarifying the criteria for tenders,
we are rationalizing the number of types of applications.
We put the operation of the tender system under the control of an independent committee that represents the interests of employers, employees and the government.
ø Anti-employee practices of multinational companies.
We declare zero tolerance towards multinationals settling and expanding in Hungary that regularly and grossly violate employee rights,
they gain significant profit from the forced turnover of the workforce,
and meanwhile Hungarian people lose their jobs as a result of their unfair market behavior, activities, and business policy.
Gross violations of labor and occupational safety legislation are sanctioned by banning from activity and revocation of operating licenses!
ø The gap between domestic and European wages.
We launch compliance programs for multinational companies, the main purpose of which is to map and eliminate unjustified differences between the benefits and workload of Hungarian employees and those working in the employer's home country.
ø For statistical magic.
We are putting an end to the statistical blindness of the current government, which tries to cover up the dramatic unemployment by including the public work program, those who have migrated abroad, and those who have fallen outside the system.
Not on the deceitful cover of sad reality,
but we will work on changing it.
3.2.5 And what we solve
√ A new Labor Code must be created to protect employees,
counterbalancing their economic vulnerability.
When amending the working time-rest period rules, we consider it a basic principle that forty hours per week,
working with a predictable schedule should be the guiding expectation.
In this way, we increase the time employees can spend on private life,
at the same time, we push employers to hire additional workers.
We ensure the Sunday rest day.
We rationalize the liability for damages in accordance with the income conditions of the employees,
we reduce its scope of applicability.
The rules for termination conditions and legal remedies are modified in the spirit of employment security and predictability.
We provide the possibility of redeeming the break between work also in the case of publicly owned companies.
We are transforming the new wage regulation and allowance system, which resulted in a decrease in wages,
we are returning the legal possibilities of securing previous benefits.
√ The working time account, through which the time of overtime is counted in the service time.
√ Retirement after 40 years of employment is also provided for men if certain conditions are met.
√ Wage settlement of public sector workers,
according to which we guarantee that the basic salaries of the salary table will be increased every year at least in line with the previous year's inflation.
The amount of the cafeteria is standardized by sector,
we raise it differentially,
and make it a mandatory benefit.
√ The conditions for performance-based pay in the field of public administration,
setting up the evaluation criteria and method for each job position,
clarifying tasks, powers and responsibilities.
We create predictable, high-quality career models for all those working in public administration,
both for professional groups of civil servants (for example, doctors, nurses, teachers, law enforcement officers).
√ Enhanced labor law protection.
This is given to employees raising a minor child alone or supporting them as a sole earner.
We will restore the option abolished by Fidesz, according to which, in the event of illness, unpaid leave can be used for care of the child up to the age of 12.
√ The job search allowance.
When determining the amount and temporal scope of this, we will consider the time spent at work and age as determining factors.
The minimum of care will be 180 and the maximum will be 360 ​​days.
√ The value of the current net minimum wage.
This must reach the current subsistence minimum.
We make the annual determination of the minimum wage, the guaranteed minimum wage, automatic and predictable.
√ Regulation of labor relations.
We will restore several previously existing trade union rights,
we fundamentally strengthen and support employee advocacy,
seeking to establish their independence.
We will severely sanction the intimidation, surveillance and removal from the workplace of union officials who act to protect the real rights of their members,
but at the same time, we will eliminate the direct engagement of trade union leaders in party politics.
However, we wish to protect the legal operation and legitimate economic interests of the employer,
in this way, we are tightening the sanctions for trade union actions that endanger jobs.
We strengthen all levels of social dialogue.
√ We are reconsidering the possibility of early retirement.
The previous profession-specific early retirement pension system will be reviewed for each position and, where justified, will be reinstated,
if necessary, we will also add new options.
With a guarantee of legal certainty, we help employers create employment agreements regarding early retirement.
Service pensioners, miners, and workers in the chemical industry should form a risk community, which would mean that the members of the community would be administered in a separate group within the National Directorate General of Pensions (ONYF).
In this way, it would be easy to verify the proposition that these workers die sooner due to the stressful life situation.
√ We are introducing electronic employment records,
with which, on the one hand, we radically reduce the administrative burdens of the world of work,
we significantly increase the validity of employment statistical data,
we improve the chances of finding a job,
on the other hand, we create an easy and quick control option over the employment relationship, or, in its absence, over the related social or pension-type benefits.
3.3 Social policy program
3.3.1 Builders and Destroyers
Hungary's population situation has been steadily deteriorating for decades.
The fertility rate in 1980 was 1.91, this number decreased to 1.34 in 2012 and 1.24 in 2011.
In terms of life expectancy at birth, we are Europe's leading
and the number of marriages has decreased drastically in recent decades.
More than 30% of children conceived are still not born,
and emigration further worsens the already worrying situation.
Since 1990, the number of Hungarians has decreased by nearly one million.
However, in order to achieve the population turnaround, a social turnaround is also necessary,
since a crippled society will not be able to create this change.
Jobbik's goal is to slow down and stop the rate of population decline with a consistent social and family policy,
then start your growth.
This primarily requires the protection of the family against anti-family liberal attacks promoting deviant behavior and alternative norms of coexistence.
Secondly, directly for greater financial support for families,
families need to be protected instead of irresponsible childbearing,
for a conscious family foundation program,
to strengthen intergenerational responsibility,
as well as to stop forced migration and to keep young people at home.
In Jobbik's vision of the future, the pillars of the nation are decent, hard-working Hungarian families with many children,
therefore, their support - which is nothing more than recognition of their investment in the nation's future - is a key strategic goal.
A family is defined as a community of life between a woman and a man, created on the basis of a voluntary decision, which of course also includes the child or children.
No significant progress has been made in the reform of the pension system either, as it has now become clear that the pay-as-you-go system cannot be maintained for a long time, and changes are needed.
Unfortunately, the initiated changes do not bring about sustainability, they only serve to gain time.
Private pension fund savings were spent,
however, no new concept was born.
In addition, the government abolished the pension contribution paid by employers and renamed it a social contribution tax.
There is a huge difference between the two, since the contribution is fixed, so it could only be spent on pensions, while the social tax - as it is not a tax - can be spent on practically anything, even on things that have nothing to do with the pension system.
However, the former employer's pension contribution, which is now called social contribution tax, would cover 70 percent of pensions.
In Hungary, by 2011, 3.1 million people were at risk of poverty or social exclusion.
The social assistance system still cannot be said to be fair, transparent or targeted -
it often operates on an ethnic basis instead of a need basis.
Unfortunately, most municipalities do not enforce the announced restrictions, which may make the payment of benefits conditional,
thus, they only created the opportunity, which can be communicated well, but there is no real political will behind it.
Although we hear a lot about labor market integration, they do not address where they want to integrate these people, because the necessary jobs are not available.
In addition to the idea that "anyone should be entitled to benefits only in exchange for work".
it must be emphasized that all this must of course go hand in hand with job creation,
moreover, with workplaces that can accommodate this large number of mostly low-educated people, in many cases with no or minimal work experience, low work culture and discipline.
Due to the shortcomings and difficulties of the surveys, we can always only give an approximate number, but the number of individuals and families left without shelter can be increased from 30,000 to 50,000.
the budget amounts were still reduced by the government.
In recent years, the labor market situation of the disabled has become equal to a robot working for a fraction of the minimum wage.
The subsidy amount of HUF 18,500 (HUF 22,500) is not even enough to survive.
Employment of people with disabilities as widely as possible is constantly lacking,
like accessibility,
institutions and programs promoting independent living are also waiting to be launched.
The ill-considered law-making would not only have remedied the existing problems, but made them worse.
Classification of rehabilitation and disability benefits as social benefits,
the chaos caused by the reviews and downgrades strengthened hopelessness, hopelessness, and fear in a social group that was already in a difficult situation,
real help, but no solution was born.
The strategic interval until 2040 is very broad,
disabled people do not receive adequate help in meeting their daily needs,
appropriate development, education, employment opportunities, and culture are becoming further and further away from this social stratum.
With the state takeover of disability care institutions, the care will again be further away
and becomes impersonal,
although it has appeared at a very low level so far.
Domestic social problems undeniably have an ethnic aspect, specifically related to Gypsies.
Anyone who tries to deny the gypsy problem does not really want a solution.
In the framework agreement signed in the spring of 2011 between the Hungarian government and the National Roma Self-Government, they also set the goal of health screening for 150,000 Gypsy citizens.
There is also the inclusion of 100,000 unemployed Gypsies in employment,
supporting the studies of 10,000 young gypsies leading to their high school diploma,
and facilitating the preparation of five thousand young Gypsies to meet the requirements for participation in higher education.
All of this was unrealistic even then, the figures in the framework agreement could not be met.
In many parts of Hungary, suffering from thefts, robberies, threats, violent crimes has become an integral part of people's daily lives,
and well-founded fear of criminals.
The police and the state almost completely leave vulnerable people, the victims,
while they emphasize that public safety has improved and only people's sense of security has worsened.
The current community conflicts and public safety problems are not caused by the portrayal of Gypsies in the media,
supporting the cultivation of Roma culture,
familiarizing the majority society with Roma traditions and cultural values ​​will solve it,
but the consistent observance and enforcement of laws,
ensuring and demanding equal rights and obligations.
So far, a lot of money has been spent on Gypsy integration,
but most of this did not reach the needy,
and the results were not measurable.
In addition, we still do not have a suitable system of tools for monitoring and evaluating interventions for the integration of the Roma community.
It must be said: the gypsy policy of the past 24 years based on aid and positive discrimination has failed
– so much so that it pushed the gypsy communities into even greater misery and hopelessness.
A safe and fair pension system!
Due to the irresponsible policies of the past decades, which sell out the country, the decent livelihood of the Hungarian people in their old age has become more and more endangered.
If there are not enough workers to produce the value of the pensions,
if wages are low and therefore there are not enough pension contributions, then the current pension payment is in jeopardy.
If there is no rapid change, then the governing parties of the past decades will continue to raise the retirement age,
and even more retire with humiliatingly low sums.
These measures clearly indicate that the pension system, which provides a secure old-age livelihood, is in danger.
Jobbik feels responsible for the predictable and safe livelihood of the elderly.
It does not see the payment of pensions as a favor given by the government, but as a rightful claim of the contributions paid by the individual, which must be returned to all contributors during their retirement years.
We solve it in 10 steps!
Our principle is to tie the individual's future pension - maintaining the principle of solidarity - more strongly to the pension contribution paid by the individual.
We are introducing the individual account so that everyone knows exactly how much pension they are entitled to each year if they decide to retire.
The introduction of a transparent, verifiable individual account promotes fair contribution payments, whitewashing of undeclared work,
because today's active-age workers are becoming even more interested in their own old-age care.
We create the possibility of voluntary savings within the state pension fund.
With this, the insured can increase their individual account with their own contributions.
We will preserve the possibility for women to retire after 40 years of employment,
and we extend the same opportunity to men.
We consider raising children as a pension-earning and pension-supplementing activity, which is why we are introducing a child-rearing pension supplement.
The sustainability of the pension system requires that as many children as possible be born.
Anyone who gives birth to a child and raises it with integrity produces value for society, but at the same time reduces their own presence on the labor market and, consequently, their chances of earning a pension.
The future Jobbik government will introduce a system that will honor this, taking into account the number of children raised with dignity and working.
Restoring the pension contribution paid by the employer.
Returning this from the social contribution tax to the pension system is of strategic importance.
In this way, it is possible to eliminate the fact that the amounts used to cover pensions are used for other purposes.
This strengthens the stability and security of the pension system.
Care for the elderly must be further developed,
including increasing resources.
We consider it essential to provide increased support for specialist care at home,
as well as the increase of the care fee, since with home care families take on sacrificial and socially useful work.
The possibility of accessing health care must be increased for the elderly,
the development of services necessary to improve their living conditions,
with particular attention to the people living in the villages.
Primarily, with the gradual increase in the number of elderly people living alone, the establishment of new nursing homes has become necessary
and increasing the number of existing ones.
That is why we are launching a new nursing home establishment program in order to create nursing home care accessible to everyone.
We are building a national signaling system service, which is a health service
and is suitable for both public safety alerts.
We will end the spread of violent crimes against the elderly by strengthening the police,
by setting up the gendarmerie,
with the controlled assistance of social self-organizations
and by tightening the penalty clauses.
The previous profession-specific early retirement pension system will be reviewed for each position and, where justified, will be reinstated,
if necessary, we will also add new options.
With a guarantee of legal certainty, we help employers create employment agreements regarding early retirement.
In the case of professions considered dangerous, the employer must pay a higher pension contribution, thereby enabling earlier retirement.
This must also be applied in the case of professions entitled to service pensions.
In the case of service pensioners and employees working in dangerous, health-damaging jobs, let's create a profession-specific risk community.
We will eliminate the practice that medical reviews often turn into inhumane and medically irritating procedures.
We will immediately end the targeted and special taxation, which is baseless from a legal point of view and from another point of view, burdening the care of ex-armed board members.
3.3.2 What we end
ø Through the transformation of the family allowance, subsistence childbearing.
The lifting and increase of the freezing of family allowances, including the family allowance since 2008
and keeping it at a real value is vital for the financial security of families.
The system of the allowance is being reformed in such a way that it is paid in the form of a tax discount from the 4th child,
and those who receive social support will also receive the family allowance on a social card together with the assistance.
The introduction of this method supports families living from decent work,
and rejects irresponsible childbearing.
ø For abuses of family allowances.
We are abolishing the universal nature of the family allowance and education support,
and benefits are tied to an additional condition in addition to compulsory school attendance.
Cooperation with educational, social and family protection institutions can be such.
If a child is taken into protective custody in a family, we monitor the use of the family allowance or education support or other benefits to ensure that it is solely and truly in the interest of the child's development.
ø Positive discrimination.
Jobbik believes in the principle that the same laws and rules should apply to everyone, regardless of ethnicity, religion or other affiliation.
We consider it especially harmful to operate positive discrimination in a way that did not expect any performance in exchange for the privileged position.
Jobbik is a believer in helping those who deserve it and not helping those who don't.
In addition to rights, the expectations for obligations must be displayed,
otherwise, we do not provide motivation to undertake the efforts necessary for integration.
3.3.3 And what we solve
√ Further encouragement of childbearing.
The future Jobbik government will preserve the system of family tax benefits,
in fact, who expands it.
We treat the elimination of disproportionalities in family income taxation as a priority task,
even with the emphasis on the birth of the first and second child.
We will continue to pay the allowance until the age of 3,
we increase its amount in such a way that having children does not equate to poverty.
In order to increase the desire to have children, we continue to maintain the system of baby bonds,
and the GYED extra.
√ Mother-friendly workplaces.
Single-rate income taxation does not promote the employment of mothers with children,
nor the spread of new, child-friendly forms of employment.
In Hungary, eight percent fewer women work than the EU average, which is 58.5%.
The situation is worse only in Greece, Italy and Malta.
It seems that part-time work has not yet brought results, as 4.5% of Hungarian women and 18.5% of their EU counterparts work this way.
In terms of remote work, the gap is also significant.
The reasons for this can also be found in the attitude of the employers,
that is precisely why the public administration, the public sector, must lead by example in this regard.
The future Jobbik government will achieve a decisive turning point in this area.
√ The reduction of the pension contribution.
Returning this from the social contribution tax to the pension system is of strategic importance.
This would strengthen the stability and security of the pension system.
We will keep the option for women to retire after 40 years of employment and extend it to men as well.
An increase in the care fee
and we are advocating its recognition as service time.
√ The individual pension account system.
Jobbik's fundamental principles include the establishment of the individual pension account system as soon as possible,
as well as the objective of making voluntary savings possible within the state fund,
therefore, the insured can increase their individual account with their own contributions.
√ Turning child-rearing into a pension-earning activity.
It is an important task to make society aware that in order to maintain the pension system, it is necessary to have as many children as possible.
Anyone who has a child and raises it with integrity produces value for society, but at the same time reduces their own presence on the labor market and, consequently, their chances of earning a pension by the energy spent on the child.
The state does not currently honor this for him.
Jobbik is introducing a system that also takes this into account.
Properly brought up children should be taken into account - linked to education - using a well-designed point system,
and thereby increase the pensions of those raising children.
√ Real job creation.
For the social sector, the real solution would not be to transform the welfare system,
but job creation, which is outlined in detail in the Seven Leaders Plan.
If this is successful, then the principle must be enforced most decisively: those who can work, but do not want to, should not eat.
√ Worthy recognition of workers in the social sector.
We will resolve the settlement of the wages of social workers with special urgency.
√ The launch of school social work at the national level.
Although, according to a government decision, it should have started in September 2013, this did not happen.
Although school social work can help reduce school violence,
for the early detection and treatment of family violence against children,
also to steer the socialization process in the right direction.
It would relieve teachers of the associated burden,
more effective solutions could be found in the framework of interprofessional cooperation.
√ The vascular model.
We consider it important to highlight the observance and enforcement of laws, rules and regulations,
the strengthening of community building and development,
the distinction between worthy and unworthy or constructive and destructive.
We find the Árpatak model good,
but considering that this is a kind of attitude, principle and practical system, it is therefore always necessary to translate it to local conditions and apply it accordingly.
Subsidies and allowances must be conditional on cooperation with basic care, whether
however, for this, the safety of the employees must be created.
No one should threaten the family caregiver, the child protection specialist, the nurse, or the teacher.
√ The development of care for the elderly.
Here, too, there is a need to increase resources.
We consider it essential to provide increased support for specialist care at home,
as well as the increase of the care fee, since with home care families take on sacrificial and socially useful work.
The possibility of accessing health care must be increased for the elderly,
the development of services necessary to improve their living conditions,
with particular attention to the people living in the villages.
We will achieve the shortening of nursing home waiting lists,
we will eliminate illegal time care institutions,
we are expanding the range of daytime services.
√ Sorting out the situation of people with disabilities.
We consider it essential to launch care programs that support independent living,
their strengthening with the residential integration of persons with disabilities in the institution, in the form of supported housing.
Providing job opportunities in municipalities would be indicative.
It would also be important to review and more specifically regulate public medical care,
expanding the range of subsidized medical aids, according to the expectations of the age.
√ A fair solution to the homeless issue.
We do not agree with the criminalization of the situation,
on the other hand, with the fact that solutions for the currently existing chronic situation must be developed in terms of public cleanliness, epidemiology,
in the sense of public order, health and social protection.
Professionally, we see the solution in the proper functioning and development of the supply system
with the addition that the observance and enforcement of laws, rules, and regulations is also essential in this area.
We will also ensure that those with a homeless card in Budapest are provided with a hot meal once a day.
We take care of homeless shelters in addition to accommodation, food and health care
about the property and physical security of the people living here.
At the same time, we claim that breaking out of homelessness is only possible if able-bodied people can find work.
Properly developed public works programs
and optimally functioning support networks together may be able to provide support to homeless people to start their lives anew.
√ Placing Gypsies at a crossroads.
First of all, an assessment of the situation of Gypsies is essential, let's finally see it clearly.
In order to eliminate Gypsy crime, we consider it necessary to strengthen the police
and the establishment of the gendarmerie,
compliance and enforcement of laws.
The huge framework for Roma integration is a race-based, inefficient, opaque "black box".
The money spigot that has existed for decades must be closed,
must be reviewed and accounted for.
The fund must be renamed and linked to a real task,
such as the boarding school system, talent management
and family support,
strengthening Hungarian identity.
We consider it important to discuss the creation of separate residential areas for deviant people, as is typical in the Netherlands.
We want to put Gypsies at a crossroads.
We help and support those who want to stay with the majority society in the construction of the country, we cry together, we laugh together,
but those who only expect good things from the majority society do not fulfill their duties,
moreover, with their antisocial behavior they even terrorize the normal majority, they are the justice system
and we will discipline them with the means of exclusion from the social system.
By the way, this principle is not only valid for Gypsies, but is enforced as a general principle that applies to everyone.
3.4 Public Safety Program
3.4.1 Public fear
Law enforcement is meant to ensure the observance and enforcement of the rules of social coexistence.
Currently, in our country, this is below the expected necessary level.
Since the creation of order and public safety is a state monopoly, the development of the current tragic situation is the responsibility of the previous governments.
Residents' subjective sense of security is poor,
the crime statistics of the law enforcement agencies are deteriorating despite all efforts.
The organizational structure of the Police, its material and technical equipment not meeting the challenges of the age, is not in proportion to the tasks to be performed,
except for some units performing special tasks.
Jobbik's law enforcement goal is to ensure that Hungary's laws apply equally to everyone,
regardless of origin, political affiliation, citizenship.
There is no place in police law enforcement for positive,
nor negative discrimination.
Between 2002 and 2010, the MSZP established the current unsustainable situation.
The condition of the police force was constantly deteriorating from an existential, moral and physical point of view.
Small settlements were left unprotected, with the massive elimination of police stations.
With inadequate provision of supplies,
the professional background was destroyed by destroying the police career.
The year 2006 and the following period were a particularly tragic period, when the Gyurcsány government lowered the level of trust in Hungarian society and the internal affairs organizations to a historic low.
Since they perceived the situation themselves, the use of ostrich politics appeared in law enforcement for the purpose of self-exculpation and smearing.
"What we don't talk about doesn't exist",
such as gypsy crime,
police corruption etc.
As was typical for other sectors, even skeptics expected the change of government in 2010 to be at least better than the previous one.
Communication has also become better.
However, the reality behind it is not.
The entire law enforcement was overwhelmed by double communication.
Correct recognition of the real problem is common, especially when Jobbik regularly draws attention to it and it is no longer possible to remain silent,
but the proposed solutions, and especially their implementation, usually do not reach the socially expected level.
The use of the police as enforcers and "toll collectors" has earned the dislike of the entire society due to the filling of budget holes.
and it did not help at all in improving the perception of the stock.
The preference for measures to improve statistics over the pursuit of criminals also did not help,
as well as the brutal increase of the violation value limit from HUF 20,000 to HUF 50,000.
The internal affairs management neglected the practical training of the staff,
allowed more and more of the more experienced to leave the field,
thereby causing serious professional uncertainty and a deterioration of efficiency in the system.
In addition, instead of seeing society as a partner, following a policy similar to that of his predecessors, he liquidated the self-defense self-organizations,
or, failing that, he tried to criminalize them.
In the case of the Hungarian Guard, Ferenc Gyurcsány, Gordon Bajnai and Viktor Orbán surrendered not to social demand, but to the expectations of the liberal international lobby.
obviously according to their own perception.
The sometimes tragic, sometimes comical, but definitely very costly crowning of this process was the establishment of the Anti-Terrorism Center (TEK) as a kind of private service alongside the government.
Cross-cycle crimes include the continuous deterioration of public safety,
the public's sense of security and the perception of the police,
that the police action is often influenced by ethnic origin.
Everyone used statistical trickery.
The presence of personnel and structural problems is a decades-old problem,
the huge fluctuation of the stock,
existential uncertainty,
thus, the fear of earning a living prevails among those on the field.
Jobbik aims to improve the subjective sense of security of the population of our country by improving public safety.
A law-abiding citizen should not see a policeman as a "punisher" and someone to be avoided, but rather a "helper" and a person to be supported.
Jobbik therefore created its sectoral program not against the police, but for the police and order.
3.4.2 What we end
The spread of violent crimes against the elderly, women and children.
With confirmation from the police,
by setting up the gendarmerie,
with the controlled assistance of social self-organizations
and by tightening the penalties, we will achieve a reduction in the increasing number and aggressiveness of crimes against the most vulnerable social groups.
We will treat the person performing a public duty - internal affairs worker, paramedic, teacher, doctor, etc. - especially strictly. violent crimes against
ø For magic with statistics.
We will eradicate the manipulation and regular falsification of criminal statistics.
We are introducing a system to demonstrate the effectiveness of the police, which is free of embellishment, realistic,
and it is also based on the opinion of citizens.
In the criminal records, we will also introduce the documentation of ethnic and sociocultural affiliation, modeled on the system used by the FBI,
thereby improving the crime prevention and detection work of investigative authorities.
ø Law violations within the police force.
We are initiating strict vetting of police leaders.
We will eliminate the corrupt relationship of a part of the police with organized criminal groups.
ø The fraudulent activities of international human rights organizations.
We are initiating the declaration of human rights organizations (TASZ, Helsinki Committee, Amnesty Int., etc.) as agents based on the Russian model, which apply double standards, hinder the police, law enforcement agencies, and local governments, and portray themselves in a false light.
ø Restrictions on social self-organization that can strengthen public safety.
We will repeal the provisions that, for political reasons, have gone far beyond the necessary and justifiable framework, and tightened the possibilities of society's self-defense organization.
For this reason, there was an amazing legal and political campaign against the Hungarian Guard, while it did not commit anything that would have harmed anyone in any way or violated the laws in force at the given moment.
Accountability!
Agent lists are made public.
Better late than never.
However, the National Remembrance Committee only serves to transfer government responsibility.
It still causes national security risk and corruption that there can be blackmailable persons in the parliament, government, at the head of state offices and companies.
We are cutting back on communist luxury pensions.
The billions saved in this way are distributed among the small pensioners.
Communist leaders are excluded from public life
and the heads of state-owned companies.
We are passing a lustration law to exclude the national leaders of the MSZMP and the KISZ from the higher forums of public involvement, such as the office of mayor, parliamentary representative, minister, head of government or head of state, as well as any leadership position of a state administrative body or state company.
We will hold the communist leaders accountable.
Sanctioning of their inhumane acts has failed;
better late than never.
We will take back the stolen assets of the MSZMP.
The illegally acquired part of MSZP's assets must be transferred to the state.
We are reviewing privatization.
Stolen state property can still be recovered, because the privatization contract is void (regardless of the statute of limitations) if it clearly conflicts with good morals (§ 200 (2) of the Civil Code), which includes, for example, selling at far below the price.
We unlock encryptions that are against the public interest.
All the dirty and corrupt cases of the past 24 years were classified jointly by Fidesz and MSZP.
If they have nothing to fear, why are they keeping these documents?
We will also hold the political criminals of the past 24 years accountable.
In order to uncover his abuses, we are calling the Gergely Pongrátz National Center for Justice into existence.
The task of the center supporting the work of the judiciary will be to detect crimes that have been covered up until now and initiate prosecution.
including the examination of the origin and legitimacy of the external state debt and loss of national wealth.
Its task is offshore companies, public procurement, EU subsidies, abuses related to agricultural land, traffic tenders, real estate sales and other privatization-type transactions, unjustified outsourcing of state tasks, abuses arising in the affairs of state administrative bodies and its background institutions (fake contracts).
We completely prohibit the accumulation of political jobs.
As of 2014, due to Jobbik's pressure, parliamentarians cannot be mayors and local government representatives,
but additional loopholes must also be prohibited, for example, ministerial commissioners cannot be MPs.
We are introducing an asset acquisition investigation among the representatives.
At the end of the parliamentary terms, all parliamentarians are subject to a mandatory wealth audit.
We reserve this option on a random basis for representatives of county assemblies and local governments.
We will also extend the mandatory wealth test to the mayors of settlements with a population of more than 5,000.
Any dual citizenship of members of parliament is made public.
If people who are also responsible for other states decide about our future, then this should be public information and not secret, as it is today.
In other countries, it is even forbidden to be a dual citizen in the parliament.
We will abolish immunity.
A politician is a person just like anyone else.
Equality before laws!
We make the representatives recallable.
In serious cases, the representatives should be held politically accountable even between elections!
We are introducing criminal liability for political decisions.
Those who, for example, left loopholes in the laws for oil matters and privatization must also bear responsibility for the votes cast and decisions,
but Gyurcsány's activities in 2006 must be a matter of criminal law,
collusion with banks in connection with foreign currency lending,
or who represented the interests of other countries with their decisions to the detriment of Hungary.
We give politicians a double punishment.
If the law is no longer obeyed by the person who makes it, how can we expect society to do it?
In the case of politicians and elected public officials, the punishments are doubled compared to what can be imposed in the basic case.
Political crime should be a classified case in the Civil Code!
3.4.3 And what we solve:
√ New police law.
The efficiency of the police must be improved at the intellectual, physical and legal levels.
The transformation of the legal framework is essential,
thus, we are creating a new police law in accordance with the challenges of our time.
We will transform police training and make it more efficient.
We are rationalizing the operation of TEK,
and we eliminate its political aspects and connections.
√ Setting up the gendarmerie.
As an effective tool in the fight against the gnawing wave of crime, following the example of our historical traditions and law enforcement organizations operating in similar areas in other countries, we are reviving the institution of the gendarmerie.
√ The rehabilitation of the Hungarian Guard.
We are creating a law that allows the Hungarian Guard to operate again, based on international models, within appropriate and reassuring rules.
and engage in socially useful activities.
√ The independence of the fire department.
We will restore the fire department that is independent of disaster management, works closely with it, but operates under independent management.
The members of the organization with many decades of tradition and the highest respect of the citizens, as well as the self-sacrificing work they perform, justify the independent management of the organization.
√ The independence of the border guard.
The experience of the past years has shown that the border guard must function as an independent organizational unit, so we are restoring it.
√ The social debate on the death penalty.
We are initiating a social consultation on the reinstatement of the death penalty.
The decision must, of course, be decided by a decisive referendum after sufficient social discussion.
If the majority's will is directed towards restoration, we undertake the necessary steps,
as well as possible international conflicts.
√ The self-sustaining prisons.
We continue to advocate and implement the program of self-sustaining and productive prisons.
It is unacceptable that convicts serving their sentences do not earn at least the cost of their detention.
√ Wage detention.
We are introducing the possibility of "detention for wages" based on international law and regulated in interstate treaties, by implementing this system we can reduce the costs of detention.
√ The tranquility of public areas.
We improve the presence in public areas by transforming the stock signs,
we adjust the number of employees to the crime rate.
We will create the "visible" police
and, in parallel, the possibility of unnoticed police presence.
√ The safety of law enforcement personnel.
For them, we are introducing a life path model that includes predictable financial and professional advancement.
Wages should be brought closer to the European average,
which, in addition to curbing corruption
it would also mean that the police officer would not have to work a second job.
We are launching the service apartment program, which helps law enforcement officers find housing.
√ Department of special cases.
We are establishing a department of special cases within the framework of the ORFK, which will deal with economic life and political circles,
will specialize in the detection of serious crimes that greatly affect public peace.
√ Follow-up of relapsers.
We are introducing a special criminal control supervision.
During this process, some of the released, repeat offenders wear a tracker capable of determining their location, so it can be easily checked in a specific period after release whether they commit new crimes.
√ The reform of the secret services.
Jobbik wants to operate the civil secret services in a unified management system, modeled after the military secret services, within the framework of the Ministry of the Interior.
We consider it necessary to increase the control of senior members of the secret services,
whereas in the recent period several events have become known that show the political use of secret services,
and resulted in unjustified contact with organized criminal circles.
We consider it important that the encryptions be reviewed in cases of great social interest (e.g. agent lists, Roma murders).
In cases where the real reasons were not related to state security, the unjustified encryptions must be removed immediately.
A priority goal is that the services, treating all members of our nation as a unified whole, are able to predict any attack against us within their jurisdiction at all times,
they can help prevent it.
3.5 Rural economy program
3.5.1 Being is at stake
The goal of our rural economy program is to provide all our compatriots with the clean food and drinking water necessary to satisfy their real needs in a sustainable manner,
the care of the rural landscape,
and the export orientation of our agricultural and food industry surplus production.
Hungary is located in one of the few areas in the world, in the Carpathian Basin, which, thanks to its incredible resources, has the ability and opportunity to be completely self-sustaining.
This essentially means that there is sufficient quality and quantity of water,
has sufficient quality and quantity of land
and has sufficient energy sources to survive.
Of course, this does not mean that Jobbik's goal is some kind of closure, as this would be impossible and undesirable in the twenty-first century.
Our goal is that by preserving and harmoniously utilizing these treasures, the people living here,
in other words, let's promote the physical and mental growth of Hungarians.
Throughout history, the Hungarian countryside has always been a kind of economic, social, cultural, political and spiritual reserve and resource for the nation.
Despite the constant historical destruction, the region has continuously preserved this role, until now.
The anti-rural nature of the last forty years of Communism and the twenty-four years of Liberalism that followed put the Hungarian countryside to the greatest test in history so far.
Now the question is no longer whether the countryside can serve as a source and reserve for the entire nation,
but whether it is able to preserve itself and save itself for the future.
The situation is dramatic.
The governments of the last 24 years are EU accession
and the Hungarian countryside was sacrificed on the altar of international compliance and expectations.
The MSZP and Fidesz bear joint responsibility for the Hungarian countryside, agriculture,
for the destruction of the food and processing industry based on it, as well as the related machine production.
The MSZP did not even give the appearance, it openly assumed the role of a traitor,
Fidesz is more cunning than this, since it likes to play the role of rural rescuer,
For Judas's money, he shows off his masters at his side, while, contrary to his promise, he delivers the country to the oligarchs.
Colonialism - and its common root, but two shades - can be perfectly demonstrated here.
There has never been a Hungarian government or prime minister who confronted the Union with the destruction of the Hungarian countryside,
who would have been able to outline how we will save the Hungarian countryside within the current European directives,
and who would not have been a hero at home, but would have hit the table in Brussels and declared: Hungarian land is no longer for sale!
They passively watched the continuous destruction, just think of the disappearance of the sugar factories or the current crisis in the meat sector.
Given the current situation, a solution can only be achieved with strong, quick and decisive government action.
That is why Jobbik must win.
If the countryside is saved, the rural economy is rebuilt, and the settlements are characterized by a decent living, livable conditions and security, then – perhaps it is not an exaggeration to say this – it amounts to the establishment of a third homeland.
If not, then – and this is no exaggeration either – the cause and future of the Hungarian nation as a whole becomes questionable.
Therefore, for Jobbik, the issue of the rural economy is not only a sectoral issue, but a national strategic task.
Therefore, the attention, energy and effort devoted to this area can and should be evaluated not only on the basis of economic aspects.
The issue of the countryside cannot therefore be a profit-oriented issue,
and the strange quirk of fate, or perhaps the reality given by divine law, is precisely that the less we approach the countryside with the aim of making a profit, the more life, health and goods, i.e. profit, it produces.
If there is a countryside, there will be Hungary,
if not, we will most likely be lost.
Jobbik's rural economy concept eliminates divisions by placing the role of agriculture as a sector in a single integrated rural economic context,
where the most important value measure is not the efficiency based on dead work, the size of the plant or the production method per se, but what and how serves the multi-factorial system of the "public good" more effectively in terms of the growth of the rural and the entire population.
It includes all product manufacturing and service activities that satisfy the country's society's need for quality food,
and also provides the export funds,
while it also produces its own input materials, machines, technologies and services.
The basic cells of the integrated system of the rural economy are businesses and farms of different sizes and activities,
and its building blocks are settlement-level economies treated as a complex whole in themselves, which are further organized along micro-regional, regional and then nationally integrated units.
3.5.2 What we end
ø Emigration of the rural population.
Here, it is not only a question of keeping the people already living there by creating the right conditions,
but also about returning those who had migrated in the meantime,
and those interested in rural life are attracted there.
This goal cannot be achieved without the creation of rural jobs.
The basis of rural job creation must be excellent Hungarian farmland
supported by targeted legislation that serves this purpose.
ø The loss of our land and water resources.
Only the agricultural strategy serves the public good, which states that all agricultural land and water resources within the country's borders are part of the national wealth, regardless of its current form of ownership and owner.
Accordingly, its ownership is legal entities
or non-Hungarian citizens cannot obtain it.
Agrarian oligarchs run amok.
We hold them accountable for the movement of public funds and state land assets and the social benefit of their use.
Preparing for the 2010 elections, Jobbik was determined that the crimes committed by Fidesz and MSZP, as replacement parties, in 20 years regarding public funds and state lands,
the playing of state economies into the hands of oligarchs,
the waste of the food industry and other crimes can be brought to an end.
However, two-thirds decided otherwise.
The current Fidesz-KDNP government has raised its mafia methods to the highest political level - the level of the legislature - by using state lands to build clientele.
Dumping of foreign products.
We enforce the principle of "minimum 80% domestic, maximum 20% imported" within the food supply of multinational shopping centers.
Placing food of harmful and unidentifiable origin on the shelf.
According to some economists, a significant part of foreign food purchased in large shopping centers is already unfit for human consumption at the moment of production.
It is also undisputed that most of the articles we consume and feed our children are full of harmful, in many cases carcinogenic, additives.
This is the unfortunate consequence of the fact that the food industry is exclusively profit driven.
Hungary has huge potential for the production of quality and healthy food, for which both domestic and international demand will grow.
There is nothing more expensive than our health.
In order to speed up this process, we are introducing the indication of the geographical origin and the extent of the journey traveled by the food on the food label,
and the fact that it is GMO-free.
ø Harmful effects related to the use of biofuels.
Jobbik aims to ensure that biofuels can only be used for food production.
The EU - including our country - has set the goal of increasing the use of biofuels on roads.
This forces food prices to be directly linked to the world market price of crude oil, as the two products compete for the same production area.
Food can be regenerated within natural limits, petroleum does not have this property, it is non-renewable.
Therefore, the depletion of crude oil reserves – whenever it happens – causes its price to rise faster.
Linking it to the price of food would mean an intolerable increase in food prices for society, causing famine.
3.5.3 And what we solve
√ Revision of our EU accession treaty in order to protect our land and markets.
It is now obvious to many that the force that created and operates the EU is the compulsion of capital to expand according to the rules of accelerated growth.
This is true even if we cover it with a glaze of common European culture and wrap it up with geopolitical arguments.
The enlargement was not an unselfish favor from the central powers of the EU, but rather a market acquisition for the products of the processing industries (including food) on the one hand,
on the other hand, ensuring the supply of cheap agricultural raw materials from the countries of the periphery, where our country was also classified.
The Fidesz politicians who prepared the accession and the MSZP politicians who signed the contract should have recognized this!
However, the pressure of the red and orange barons behind the two parties clouded their clarity.
They would rather accept 25% of the subsidy due to the farmers of the old member states and the 100% opening of our markets, than refuse to categorize our farmland as capital, the free flow of which is an inviolable "sacred cow".
Even after 10 years, the level of support now reaches that of the farmers of the old member states,
but the fact that it is based on territory preserves the colonial raw material-producing nature of Hungarian agriculture,
combined with our food industry, which has completely collapsed in the meantime.
Both factors are the cause of a significant decline in rural jobs.
√ Keeping Hungarian land in Hungarian hands,
as long as we stipulate in the Basic Law that the prohibition of foreigners and legal entities acquiring land must be maintained even after 2014.
The weight given to this question in our program is no better indication than that we will achieve the protection of our land even at the cost of questioning our EU membership.
If the Union refuses to accept the preservation of our land ownership, which is vital for Hungary's future, as a kind of national peculiarity that we cannot let go of, it will only prove that the EU is not a community of nations,
but a dictatorship dominated by multinational capital.
And we have no place in such a community.
√ The rural economy based on family farms.
In the spirit of this, we shift the emphasis in our agricultural policy from large factories operating on the basis of interests to value-based food production based on the production of small and medium-sized family farms serving rural areas with high added value.
From the point of view of utilizing the job creation potential of the countryside, this question is crucial.
√ Establishing operating regulations that serve the public good.
Which means the principle of "one owner one plant",
and the maximum size of the plant at the level that ensures the livelihood of an average Hungarian family.
This is 50-200 hectares today.
Finally, it must be noted that whoever owns a piece of Hungarian agricultural land, which is part of the national property, is also obliged to create the highest possible number of jobs for himself, his family or his employees.
Today, this is realistically 5-25 hectares, depending on land quality and culture.
√ The production of quality food.
The main priority of quality food production should be the full supply of the domestic population,
but of course starting production for export is also a fundamental goal.
Within this, the ecologically certified products deserve a special mention.
Specially encouraging their production also means tourist attraction, if we make this a part of the country's image along with other known attractive factors.
√ The recovery and acquisition of food markets.
This primarily means regaining our domestic food markets.
Food processing enterprises that have gained a foothold in the domestic market can then target world markets with their surplus products that reach world standards.
This together with the population's security of supply
and also represents significant job creation potential,
in contrast to today's practice, when Hungarian agriculture has sunk to the level of a raw material production machine typical of colonies.
√ Implementation of food self-determination.
Jobbik considers it important to restore the country's food self-determination, which our governments have gradually renounced over the past twenty years in the name of liberalization.
Food self-determination is the right of a country to determine its own agricultural and food policy and trade.
This does not mean the closure of the country's food trade, as its opponents would like it to be,
but only its regulation as required by the interests of domestic producers and consumers.
It is in vain that we can exclude foreigners from the land market, if domestic farmers cannot make a living in the completely open food market, being at a competitive disadvantage in some cases.
Placing agricultural land under protection without the regulated protection of our food markets - that is, the self-determination of food - can result in the Hungarian farmer, whose land ownership is protected, being unable to gain exposure to the market.
Keeping agricultural land in domestic hands is therefore a necessary, but not sufficient, step on the way to building our national self-determination.
√ Restoring the correct proportions within agriculture.
In recent decades, the correct ratio of animal husbandry and crop cultivation, suitable for our abilities and possibilities, has broken down.
The restoration of this cannot be left to the "invisible hand" of the free market, but requires state intervention and activity.
√ The security of producers.
At the moment, the level of insecurity and fear of ruin is higher than average among those who make a living from agriculture
– especially among farmers in smaller areas, which is partly a consequence of the EU area-based support system, which is biased in favor of large farms.
Many of them feel that there is an inverse proportion between the hard work done and the reward that comes from it,
and that in this situation they are left to themselves in an environment dominated by big capitalists.
This has to stop.
By establishing a market regulation system for the supply, we ensure that the producer always has access to the income that ensures his expenses and a decent living.
√ The creation of self-organizing economic communities.
We spread the cooperative - Ant-type - purchase and sale form organized on a territorial basis for different levels of food self-determination, in addition to the one organized along the product line,
but with different regulations.
For this, the supporting presence of the state,
we provide all the necessary legal environment.
We consider the paradigm that small family farms are not competitive and unable to export to be false.
Western examples prove just the opposite.
With sufficient state background, sufficient freedom, and sufficient market, the cooperation of the small ones can indeed be competitive,
moreover, in such a way that, in the meantime, their operation does not upset the conditions of the natural environment at all,
as well as increase job opportunities.
We encourage the increase in the production of Hungarian goods created by the work of domestic cooperatives for export.
√ The local money substitutes.
Support for local, self-sustaining, eco-social farming is not talked about more than anything else in the world,
which is terribly hypocritical, since they do this at such conferences, such speakers - respect for the exception! – who, meanwhile, are the leading actors of the large multinational, global, destructive economy.
Jobbik is not afraid to confront this global lobby,
local money can be one of the top weapons in this fight.
The domestic initiatives remained isolated experiments due to the hostile or maximally neutral attitude of the state, government,
but they can still show a lot of success.
A supportive legal environment must be provided for local money substitutes so that they can develop their economic stimulation potential.
√ The broadening of knowledge and knowledge of eco-social rural economy.
Many people believe that Hungarian agriculture cannot recover because the old knowledge has been lost from the generations now growing up.
Unfortunately, there is some truth in this, but in our opinion it is not an insurmountable obstacle.
According to Jobbik, Hungarian knowledge about land and agriculture is ancient knowledge, by which we mean that it can be retrieved and spread again if there is sufficient government intention and work.
Basic, secondary and higher education of young people,
and the necessary research and development activity must be carried out in the spirit and at the service of our rural strategy,
the rural unemployed for land and food production,
as well as the introduction of practical training related to village catering.
√ Controllability related to the operation of the sector.
In addition to the standard GDP measurement, we are introducing a system of tools for measuring and improving social well-being.
This also serves to measure the progress of our rural rescue program,
and puts a tool in the hands of local communities exercising social control.
3.6 Municipal program
3.6.1 Left-wing municipalities
Since 1990, the local government system has stubbornly resisted cycle changes, as a result of the two-thirds status of the law.
However, the changes of the last four years have sealed its fate.
Since the total of the 3,200 settlements represents the 93,000 square kilometers of present-day Hungary, the destruction caused by the "reforms" announced by the Orbán government cannot be considered a layer problem.
The larger and more complex a system is, the more subtle interventions are needed to meaningfully transform it.
In 2010, Jobbik proposed several important changes.
We also proposed restructuring the system of financing, asset management, public services, state administration frameworks, and EU tenders.
Of these, the Fidesz government first distorted a good few into part of its rhetoric,
and later introduced in a distorted form and made into law.
Our basic thesis is that a vibrant settlement is socially and economically autonomous and self-sustaining,
provides public safety
and is in balance with the surrounding landscape.
We continue to build our concept on this.
By the end of the socialists' eight years, the list of tasks and powers of local governments already consisted of 900 pages, which reflected a huge disproportion in the division of tasks between the settlements, counties and the state.
Since the law never determined to what extent and for what purpose funds should be allocated from the central budget to the local government subsystem, the support became less and less.
The continuous underfunding served to "starve" the settlements,
which led to asset accumulation and indebtedness,
which was a breeding ground for corruption and abuse of power.
With the reduction of budgetary norms, the standard of performance of local government tasks also deteriorated significantly.
The criminal record of the MSZP governments is almost inexhaustible.
The establishment of the hierarchy of public administration was rethought as government cycles.
The most significant change was the regional and sub-regional assignment that we assumed as a result of joining the European Union, which was completely foreign to our public administration traditions.
Starting with the Antall government, local governments have always had legality checks,
therefore, the period of the Bajnai government, during which the control function did not work, cannot be qualified.
The basic problem with the tender opportunities is that the goals were not defined here, in Hungary.
Countless amounts of money were spent on unsustainable investments,
in many cases overbilled.
Important and necessary investments were also made,
but even in these cases, due to the lack of self-reliance, the settlements were in debt for many years.
Lack of consequences was typical, creating the need for accountability.
With a few exceptions, local government leaders did not know what treasures they were squandering when they made decisions,
or if they knew, they did not act in the interest of their settlement.
Financial vulnerability or possible unprofessional, bad faith decisions have caused a lot of damage to the life of our settlements,
and led to a significant loss of property.
We can only know the exact magnitude of this if a national-level asset inventory is prepared.
There is no such thing to this day.
3.6.2 The system of national destruction
After the change of government in 2010, they started implementing big plans.
However, this did more harm than good.
Primary and secondary schools were maintained by the state, only their operation remained with the municipality.
On the part of the state, however, there is not a well-prepared reception institution that could effectively bear all the responsibilities of the task.
The current situation foresees the closure of hundreds of schools,
which means a coup d'état for a small settlement fighting for its existence.
The situation is similar in the field of health care.
The hospitals and clinics built by local governments were nationalized with the stroke of a pen, operating,
well-used classes are closed,
complete specialist clinics are emptied.
In terms of "rationalization", the Fidesz government is slowly overtaking even the late SZDSZ.
The new local government law brought further significant changes in the performance of tasks.
Localities can only finance voluntary tasks from their own income,
while they receive support for the mandatory ones.
The 2013 budget law revealed that this support rate is only 30-50% in some cases.
The bleeding of the municipal sphere continues at an accelerating pace,
which is not offset by comprehensive debt consolidation either.
In settlements with less than 2,000 people, the mayor's office was abolished, which had disastrous consequences.
Although the obligation of self-sufficiency and self-care was used in the new law using Jobbik's proposal,
but under the current conditions, the expectation of this is an illusion.
Despite the serious changes announced in the field of settlement management, utilities and public services, we cannot speak of real results.
According to the new local government law, any public service can only be provided by a company in which the state or local government has a majority influence,
but this is played with "hundreds of tricks" by friendly companies.
(Parking in public areas, for example, can now only be carried out by municipally owned companies, but these tasks are outsourced one by one.)
There is deep silence around the reclaiming of sewerage works or gasworks.
Although the government is trying to force companies to sell their business units with fee reductions and additional taxes, this only works in the opposite way.
While, for example, the outsourcing of BKV and the subcontracting of bus services are taking place at full speed.
Life in our towns is made miserable by crime every day.
While the legislation made it impossible for national self-defense movements, the Hungarian Guard or alternative civil guard organizations.
The new self-government law made it the responsibility of the localities to cooperate in ensuring public safety.
You can ensure this by setting up an independent organization,
but money is no longer allocated by the central budget.
Thus, only a few municipalities can afford to set up and operate this organization, which consists of public land inspectors, field rangers and their assistants.
Along with the abolition of the regional system, the county level was also rendered weightless.
They did organize the districts, but they did not make county tasks more accessible, but they emptied the settlement level.
As a result, official work and the performance of tasks became even further away from the citizens.
In the framework of the reform, the administrative offices were replaced by government offices,
led by politicians who directly implement the will of the central government.
Not only did they get their inspection licenses back,
but they were also given supervisory powers, which previously only the public prosecutor's office had.
According to the new self-government law, acting in this capacity, they can even create a decree instead of the representative bodies.
The financial control of local governments will be similarly close, according to which the Ministry of Internal Affairs can practically control the financial situation of individual settlements up to date.
It is a complete failure that Hungary was not able to borrow so much money even by the end of the seven-year programming cycle.
In order to reduce the loss, Hungary was granted a two-year transition period.
Accountability was not only missed,
but it was also spectacularly revealed: the MSZP and Fidesz are afraid of the common prey.
The complaints made by Jobbik did not have tangible results either.
The practice of the previous twenty years continues undisturbed.
The legislative work of the government boasts such monstrosities as the amendment of the laws on investments of special importance from the point of view of the national economy, on the protection of cultural heritage, on public administrative procedures or on construction, in order to allow certain large contractors close to the government to gain an advantage,
grossly curtailing the freedom of local governments to enact regulations.
In 2011, the Act on National Assets was passed, according to which the assets of local governments are part of the national asset.
According to the government's rhetoric, nationalization - if it concerns a local government institution - only means reallocation of assets.
The law did not bring about any substantive changes in the property management of local governments.
He does not even mention land as a value to be protected.
3.6.3 What we end
Waste of municipal property.
Real and rapid public ownership of public service providers and utility companies by immediately renegotiating privatization contracts,
and by investigating the circumstances of the privatization in criminal proceedings - with real accountability.
After the state public ownership, the territorially affected local governments must also be provided with a share of ownership.
All information generated in connection with the operation of state and local government companies must again be classified as public data.
ø The depopulation of the villages.
The basis of the life program of Hungarian villages: self-determination,
self-sufficiency,
self defense.
Self-determination in decisions about local life, in the maintenance of public services,
self-sufficiency in everyday needs (food, water, energy)
and self-defense to be able to preserve all of this.
To complete this program, you need the following: functioning institutions - office, school, kindergarten, clinic, village hall, library, church,
professionals living and working there,
middle class,
farmland.
The local government should have land in order to be able to put local residents to work,
partly in such a way that it creates the possibility of self-sufficiency for them,
and partly by producing crops necessary for the maintenance of its own institutions.
But let the middle-class intellectual who is willing to settle in a village to work in the local institutions and to ensure the livelihood of his own family also get land.
A new land division is needed.
The compensation process derailed and ended in a dead end,
the smashing and theft of teapots was largely carried out through crimes,
therefore, a new order must be created in this area.
We do not consider these crimes time-barred.
This is especially true in the case of land acquired through pocket contracts.
Illegally acquired property must be confiscated
and to give to whom it is due.
ø The overpowering of government offices.
The county government offices can only exercise control powers over the settlements.
In the spirit of self-government, independence must be ensured for individual settlements,
and for this, in addition to continuous accountability, it is also necessary to ensure management freedom.
ø Unreasonable use of development resources.
According to Jobbik's program, instead of the difficult and unfair tendering system, the local governments receive the development grants whose beneficiaries are the local government sector on a practically normative basis.
These EU grant funds should be provided to the settlements on a subjective basis (proportionate to the number of people and abilities), in the event that they can support the realization of the goals they have set with a plan developed on the basis of a checklist, of a suitable level and detail.
3.6.4 And what we solve
√ Accountability.
Many people do not know that the majority of political corruption is not connected to the parliament, but to local governments.
The restart cannot therefore be done without accountability.
A separate economic protection office will deal with the investigation of such cases,
furthermore, that the death penalty can also be imposed in the case of economic crimes affecting public funds and public property.
√ Development of livable settlements.
Already in its 2010 program, Jobbik stated as a goal that every settlement should have a doctor, kindergarten teacher, teacher, and pastor.
That is, there should be functioning basic institutions (school, clinic, office, village hall, church) that make even the smallest village livable.
√ 3200 real municipalities.
Full state support should be provided for the performance of the mandatory tasks to an appropriate standard.
The beneficiaries of 8% of the sja will once again be the settlements,
and we return 100% of the vehicle tax to each municipality.
Support can also be requested for tasks undertaken voluntarily.
Each settlement should have a mayor's office adapted to the number of inhabitants, because community life can only be managed locally and directly.
Professionals working in the institutions of the municipality - together with the local doctor and teacher - are also the defining actors of the cultural and community life of the settlement.
We maintain the 3200 settlements,
and we are also advocating the formation of local governments.
Responsibilities abstracted by the creation of districts must be returned to the settlements,
together with the state task financing that serves as their cover.
√ The security of settlements.
With the reinforcement of the police and civil guard,
by setting up the gendarmerie
and the normal conditions must be guaranteed by expanding the local governments' own law enforcement opportunities and room for maneuver, appropriate to their localities.
We will eradicate the prevailing fear in public spaces,
with particular regard to the spread of aggression affecting the elderly, women and children.
√ The health care of the villages.
In addition to the comprehensive regulation of the health sector, we will maintain the municipal maintenance of specialist clinics,
with adequate state funding
and that no village is left without adequate medical care.
√ The multi-level public administration.
According to Jobbik's program, Hungary needs to build real defense lines.
One of the most important tools for this is the multi-level public administration endowed with substantial powers.
We return the institutions with territorial powers to the county governments,
as well as conferring on them the rights that ensure the true ability of territorial development.
Responsibilities abstracted by the creation of districts must be returned to the settlements at the expense of the state.
We will keep the district level, so that it helps the work of the settlements,
and with the rights taken over from the county level, it can represent regional interests in a more direct way.
√ Protecting our settlements.
As in 2010, we now also recommend defining the concept of public property,
a part of which would also be the determination of the potential in the landscape.
In this regard, we advocated the creation of an ecologically sustainable city model,
and the establishment of an architectural enforcement authority.
Without exception, we will revoke the contrary legislation created by the Orbán government,
we will take away the ill-gotten gains.
Together with the definition of the concept of public treasure, we also take into account our ideological values.
The damage caused in this is considered extremely serious.
In the case of settlement property, the land is an inalienable asset.
The protection of land assets should be the central element of legal regulation,
including the determination of the notional value of the land.
3.7 Energy program
3.7.1 The third leg
For the survival of a country or a community, there are three vital things it must have or it will perish.
with water,
with land (that is, with food)
and energy.
These are the three legs, any one of which is missing, the table topples over.
Energy is needed to sustain human civilization,
therefore, the decisive factor in world political processes is the struggle for influence over energy carriers, occasionally triggering armed conflicts.
It is of strategic importance for a country that energy production and distribution operate under state management and control.
In contrast, almost everything in this sector has been sold in Hungary over the past two decades.
The MSZP-SZDSZ coalition committed the "prime crime" in the field of energy, when it privatized this sector of national strategic importance in 1995 for the sake of one-time budget revenue.
The operational efficiency of foreign companies was realized at the cost of reducing the level of services, by eliminating branches,
by eliminating jobs.
The huge profit repatriated every year was based on the 8% profit on assets guaranteed by the state.
During its new eight-year administration, the MSZP served foreign, partly multinational, companies in all respects.
The program of the first Orbán government entitled The foundations of Hungarian energy policy, the business model of energy provided for the complete liberalization of energy,
exposing consumer groups unable to compete to the lobby interests of the foreign-owned energy provider.
The government spectacularly pulled out of the energy industry citing liberalization.
The increase in electricity prices for consumers was carried out in such a way that a significant part of the additional income from the price increase was regrouped to the foreign owners.
Privatizations did not result in price reductions in any area.
The neoliberal economic model has clearly failed,
while the liberalization of energy markets in the European Union created huge international monopolies,
with a powerful political advocacy capacity.
The government that was established in 2010 failed to change the high dependence on imports for energy carriers.
A direct and favorable agreement with the supplier Gazprom would be necessary to reduce the high gas prices.
For this, a good political relationship with Russia should be established,
which is made more difficult by several harmful and irresponsible statements made by Viktor Orbán as opposition party leader towards Russia.
A favorable opportunity to rely on domestic energy sources would have been the partially state-owned expansion and modernization of the Mátra Power Plant, which uses lignite,
however, the plan did not materialize.
Based on EU expectations, the country committed itself to increasing the share of renewable energy sources to 13.5% by the 2020 deadline.
An expedient means of this could be the construction of floodgates on the Danube and the Tisza, which are necessary for ecological, navigational, flood protection and water management reasons,
their energetic utilization.
The government even refuses a professional examination of the issue,
doctrinairely sticking to his behavior against the dam with a liberal political background, which has caused damage so far.
In the field of energy, Fidesz is pushing for a single result with all its media power, the reduction of utilities.
We naturally regard this step as positive, we supported it,
adding, however, that he implemented the extra-profit deduction that Jobbik had been representing and even demanding.
In order to ensure the security of natural gas supply, Jobbik agreed to the state buyback of its gas transport and storage capacity from E.ON,
at the same time, he considered the price paid to be unrealistically high, based on expert opinions, and therefore initiated the establishment of a parliamentary investigation committee,
but his motion was not supported by the governing parties.
Distribution of the most important primary energy sources: coal approx. 11%, oil 27%, gas 43%, nuclear 13.5%, geothermal 3.5%.
Primary energy used in electricity production: coal 28%, oil 4%, natural gas 26%, nuclear 42%.
In the 1980s, more than half of our energy consumption came from domestic sources,
on the other hand, today the proportion of imports exceeds 70%, for hydrocarbons 80%.
Our crude oil and natural gas reserves are severely limited.
Unfortunately, previous governments also ensured the exploration and production of new fields for foreign companies with disadvantageous concession contracts.
3.7.2 What we end
ø The sale of carbon dioxide quotas.
Instead, they must be used at home to operate coal-based thermal power plants,
primarily for the use of domestic brown coal and lignite assets.
ø Eradication of agricultural and forest areas for the purpose of bioenergy.
To operate a biomass power plant or to produce biofuel under domestic conditions, it is not advisable to cut down forests or sacrifice agricultural land,
as this can only happen at the expense of food and feed production.
However, municipal garbage and agricultural waste that is not suitable for other uses can be used to produce thermal energy and/or electricity.
Jobbik aims to ensure that biofuels can only be used for food production.
For creating a "dark green" mood.
The energy solutions proposed by the extreme green movements should only be applied on the basis of a thorough preliminary economic and ecological analysis,
showing whether the high costs bring such an ecological benefit that it is really worth making consumers and taxpayers pay for it.
Also, in the case of such suggestions, it is also advisable to examine whether there is some kind of industrial lobby behind the ideas dressed in a humanitarian and environmentally conscious costume, the purpose of which is not at all to find harmonious solutions, but to make competition impossible.
ø The clock change due to summer time.
In addition to the introduction of summer time, there were arguments for energy saving at the time.
Since then, it has become clear that - especially given Hungary's geographical conditions - the amount of savings is practically zero,
while the transition in itself means a significant increase in costs,
and people's well-being is negatively affected by the twice-yearly "reprogramming" of the biorhythm.
By eliminating the transfer, everyone will win.
3.7.3 And what we solve
√ State influence in the field of energy.
Energy services of strategic importance must be operated under the control and management of the state.
One possibility for this is the full or partial recovery of ownership.
Hydrocarbon research activities must be taken back into state hands,
the concession contracts must be reviewed.
The possibility of cheap buyback and renovation of previously privatized and since "closed" power plants should be considered.
A two-thirds law must be created on community ownership of wired energy systems.
√ The Paks expansion with Russian technology.
In its EP election program published at the beginning of 2009, Jobbik already indicated the extension and expansion of the lifetime of the Paks nuclear power plant as a goal,
thereby increasing the security of supply
and reducing the price of electricity.
Increasing our power plant capacity with the expansion in Paks is also advisable because nuclear energy, as a clean and cheap energy, is the most suitable for significantly reducing the emission of greenhouse gases, which are considered the cause of global warming.
Considering the current technology in Paks and the importance of Russian economic relations, Jobbik has repeatedly stated that it prefers cooperation with Russia in this field.
We regret that it was only in the fourth year of its operation that the government reached an agreement with Russia that was able to fulfill the provisions of the April 2009 parliamentary resolution on expansion.
In relation to domestic participation in nuclear power plant construction projects, we consider it a key issue to avoid the fact that foreign companies operating in Hungary or consortia with a suspicious composition are awarded contracts - instead of genuine Hungarian enterprises.
Jobbik will ensure the greatest transparency and publicity in this area if it comes to government.
We consider it justified the operation of a special parliamentary committee that spans parliamentary cycles, whose members accompany each phase of the investment,
also assessing secret information from a national security point of view.
√ Utilization of hydropower.
It is necessary to make maximum use of the water energy that can potentially be used on our rivers,
with which 10-12% of domestic energy consumption can be ensured,
and which is also the most controllable and cheapest electricity.
√ Construction of pump turbine energy storage power plants.
In this way, network instabilities caused by renewable energies with fluctuating power depending on the weather will be eliminated.
However, with the operation of the balancing power plant, the exploitation of renewable energy sources could be multiplied,
and the use of fossil energy carriers could decline.
√ Ensuring the local role of geothermal energy.
Geothermal energy can be used economically for heating buildings, greenhouses for vegetable production, and for reducing the energy needs of small communities striving for self-sufficiency.
However, it is a fact that it is not profitable for electricity production based on the depth and physical parameters of the heat sources.
√ Utilization of wind and solar energy.
In the case of the construction of adequate regulatory power, it must be possible for anyone to set up wind power plants with fluctuating power depending on the weather at their own risk.
In addition to domestic conditions, state support for wind farms must be abolished.
Here, such power plants can operate with a maximum utilization of around 20%.
Solar energy can be used economically for heating and hot water production.
However, in the current state of technology, it is generally not economical to produce electricity,
except for the so-called stand-alone solutions, where connection to the electrical network is very expensive or technically impossible.
√ Effective energy market consumer protection.
In addition to market players, consumer advocates, environmentalists and civil society organizations must be involved,
an interest conciliation forum must be established,
the public and free access to energy information must be ensured.
√ Energy saving of households.
State support should be used to encourage the conversion of natural gas-heated apartments to energy-saving heat pump heating,
all the more so because this can significantly improve the polluted air in cities.
With increased utilization of domestic coal assets, it is necessary to ensure that the price of household electricity is not higher than the price of energy obtained from natural gas.
Electricity can not only be used universally, but - at the point of use - it does not emit any harmful substances, which is why air pollution in big cities could be significantly reduced.
Energy-efficient construction should be supported to an increased extent
and modern thermal insulation of old buildings.
√ The spread of alternative fuels.
It is advisable to promote the spread of gas-powered, hybrid-powered or other fuel-saving vehicles with tax incentives.
√ The competitiveness of domestic energy knowledge.
The support of domestic energy research and development (R+D) is of prime importance.
It must be achieved that the support of energy R&D proportional to GDP reaches at least the EU average.
Vocational energy training should be emphasized in higher education,
the energy and environmental protection knowledge of teachers (especially physics and chemistry teachers) involved in public education must be expanded.
All of these (organizational, organizational, financial, etc.) conditions must be created and developed.
3.8 IT program
3.8.1 Frozen rudders
It is difficult to find an industry that is present in so many areas and has such a decisive influence on our everyday life as IT and telecommunications.
Information and communication technology (ICT) is one of the engines of our economy.
The sector produces more than 10% of domestic GDP.
With significant growth potential,
sector with high added value,
therefore, it is of strategic importance for Hungary.
It is no coincidence that in the Seven Leaders Plan part of our program, we set the goal of making Hungary a great power in the field of information communication technology development.
As a result of the wrong decisions of the past decades, our country has become an IT developer and solution provider instead
has become a market for multinational companies.
We spend tens of billions of forints a year on the acquisition of systems that we could produce ourselves, even by using and further developing the currently available open source systems.
Unfortunately, the change of government in 2010 did not bring significant changes in this area either.
There is a significant shortage of quality and quantity professionals in the Hungarian ICT labor market,
which also limits growth.
This is further exacerbated by the current government's reform of higher education, which adversely affects IT and telecommunications engineering education.
The development of highly important products and services with high added value and the promotion of Hungarian ICT companies' access to the market cannot be achieved without quality professionals.
An important pillar of preserving national independence and reducing dependence on foreign countries is the IT research and development base serving domestic Hungarian interests and the independent Hungarian IT industry.
Currently, the largest part of the capital invested in the industry does not support innovation, but production that is already operating and introduced on the market.
That is why it is important to promote and support infocommunications research and development with the help of domestic and EU tenders, preferential loans, and the appropriate legal environment.
The lack of IT skills causes significant damage to the economy and society,
and for employees, it means an increasingly serious disadvantage when it comes to employment.
The relatively high prices of telecommunications and Internet services also hinder economic development.
In some settlements, the basic infrastructure is provided by only one service provider,
thus, due to their monopolistic position, competition cannot develop in the development of the quality of services, nor in the reduction of prices.
The state also does a lot to cement these conditions with the help of various infrastructure development tenders
instead of using the funds to develop the basic telecommunications infrastructure in public hands, which could then be used by service companies under the same conditions.
We are currently facing a technological change: ADSL technology is being replaced by fiber optic technology in more and more places, so the model change could be implemented based on the already established state backbone network and the replacement of current subscriber sections in the near future.
This state involvement would also make it possible to reduce the price of telecommunication services (internet, telephone, television).
During the time of the socialist governments, it was a serious mistake to end the unified IT management.
The consequences of this were fragmented, disorganized state IT purchases and developments without meaningful economic and return calculations.
Due to the deficiencies in the operation contract of the Unified Government Girincháló, a price-value imbalance occurred.
The Customer Gateway portal is expensive and backward in terms of IT.
The kormanyszovivo.hu portal is unnecessary,
its wasteful implementation did not help to restore its reputation either.
Finally, the high point was the exclusion of large IT public procurements from public procurement, citing reasons of national security.
Fidesz launched several attacks against the Internet and the Internet society.
Within the framework of its press laws, it tried to censor bloggers and internet newspapers and news sites,
then signed the ACTA agreement, which tries to severely restrict internet freedom,
from which he finally withdrew due to social and Jobbik pressure.
It made the possibility of Internet censorship into law.
He recklessly tried to create the state mobile operator,
as a result of which the court annulled the decision.
This will cause a significant delay in the introduction of free internet access for citizens.
He sabotaged the introduction of open source systems in public administration,
while, contrary to his previous promise, he repeatedly concluded a strategic agreement worth tens of billions of forints with the well-known multinational software company.
Similarly, the meaningful introduction and use of open standards has also been left behind.
Finally, as the culmination of his rampage, he unprepared ordered the cash registers to be connected online.
3.8.2 What we end
ø Our vulnerability in the field of information communication.
We are reducing our country's IT dependence on foreign countries
let's increase the e-independence of our country in cooperation with domestic developers.
We introduce open source systems and document formats in the public sector,
and we support their spread to citizens and actors of economic life.
We store public state information only in open document formats and systems accessible through open standards.
If there is closed and open source software with the same functionality and cost of ownership for a task, then we must choose the open source software.
In all schools, we teach the use of open source systems as part of IT subjects.
We are creating an open-source IT package for small and medium-sized companies, which can be used by businesses free of charge,
and with its help they can modernize their business process free of charge.
We provide tax relief for businesses for the IT training required for the introduction of open source systems.
ø The unreasonableness of the current utility tax.
The government recklessly introduced the utility pipe tax, which disproportionately burdens small companies,
as it has to be paid based on the length of the line, not the transmission power.
ø Forced software distribution.
We will eliminate the current bad practice, according to which the computer and the operating system are sold together, thereby providing a significant advantage to the product of the given software company.
ø Connecting mobile phone customers to a node.
We prohibit the distribution of service provider-dependent mobile phones, which is one method of tying customers to a lock.
We take action against unilateral contract changes by landline, mobile and internet service providers,
against loyalty contracts that discriminate against old users,
We maximize the duration of loyalty contracts at 1 year.
ø Royalty for blank media.
In this way, the copyright protection interest group unfairly affects honest, law-abiding citizens,
and causes unjustified economic disadvantages.
ø Service and political abuses.
We promote the enforcement of the principle of net neutrality,
thus, we prohibit the filtering, blocking, influencing and monitoring of end users' data traffic by service providers.
We will abolish the Internet censorship introduced by Fidesz-KDNP.
ø Parallel developments in public administration.
We make the local government software developed with state funds available to all local governments,
thereby eliminating parallel and wasteful developments.
3.8.3 And what we solve
√ Free mobile internet.
We make access to the broadband network a subject right in Hungary.
As part of this, we provide citizens with a limited but free basic mobile internet service.
√ World-class research and development.
We support IT basic research by setting up state research institutes.
The research results will be available to everyone under the same conditions.
We support industry research institutes,
setting up global research networks and research associations.
√ Complete electronic administration system.
We will also make electronic administration mandatory for local governments,
within this framework, we take care of the retraining and education of the employees.
√ Electronic archiving.
All documents produced on paper are archived electronically in an electronic filing system for later retrieval.
The documents to be discarded are archived in digital form.
We publish public data on the Internet free of charge, in a structured and processable form.
√ The infrastructure of schools.
We develop the school ICT infrastructure,
and we provide high-speed Internet access to all schools.
√ The spread of electronic commerce.
We support the spread of full-scale electronic commerce by promoting electronic procurement, invoicing, payment and tax reporting.
√ IT aspects of benefits.
We are expanding the scope of the cafeteria to include information technology tools and services.
3.9 Health Program
3.9.1 Essential things are decided in the head
The state of health in Hungary is at a catastrophic level.
The nation is seriously ill.
The total mortality rate is one and a half times the average of the 27 EU countries,
twice with us due to circulatory diseases,
43 percent more people die from cancer than the EU average.
Leading causes of death are smoking and alcohol,
and our suicide statistics remain one of the worst in the world.
Popular diseases include high blood pressure, various chronic heart diseases, diabetes and high blood fat levels, asthma, allergies, osteoporosis, panic disorder and depression.
The number of disabled people and those limited in their daily activities is growing rapidly.
Seeing all of this, we rightly wonder if the background of this situation is solely the problems of the Hungarian healthcare system,
or something else.
The answer is clear.
Other too.
The real question is what?
Despite the continuous cuts and withdrawals, the Hungarian healthcare system still performs above its capacity,
Hungarian society is in a terrible state.
However, this does not stem from some ethnic characteristic, our tendency to get sick,
nor is it a historical heritage, that is, it is not something we have to learn to live with.
The Hungarian nation is not sick, but the Hungarian nation has been made sick.
One of the first and ancient truths of medicine is that most diseases are of spiritual origin.
If this is true for an individual, it is also true for a community.
And here we found the answer to our question at the beginning of the paragraph.
The roots of the health problems of Hungarians can basically be traced back to mental and spiritual causes.
A nation that does not feel good, that is mutilated, that is invaded, that is oppressed, that is stifled in its desire for freedom,
which is constantly lied to, which is regularly deceived,
which is reduced to misery, sooner or later its soul will be poisoned.
And the nation whose soul is poisoned will sooner or later deteriorate in physical condition as well.
This is what has happened to us in the last seventy years.
The complete solution can therefore be the elimination of the above mental-spiritual poisoning,
but it is also true that at the same time something must be done about the crisis situation in the health sector.
The future Jobbik government therefore wants to eliminate the catastrophic health condition of Hungarian society from two directions: on the one hand, the spiritual and spiritual strengthening of the national community,
on the other hand, by saving healthcare.
This chapter is about the latter,
while our program as a whole is about the former.
Jobbik's drug policy
The lack of a drug strategy for several years has caused confusion, chaos and serious damage in drug policy in recent years.
And the strategy finally adopted in 2013 does not include the allocation of resources linked to goals, without which the achievement of the goals is not guaranteed.
According to Jobbik, a drug policy is needed where a strategy not only contains nice-sounding phrases, but also assigns resources to them,
and which can reduce drug use across governments, promoting the stable operation of the organizations concerned.
In recent years, the resources devoted to prevention have decreased to a fraction of previous years,
which now threatens the operation of prevention programs.
It is therefore necessary to increase the amount to be spent for this purpose.
A distinction must be made between drug producers, distributors and consumers.
For distributors
and those who produce new designer drugs should be subject to heavier penalties than the current ones.
Law enforcement activities dealing with drug abuse should be strengthened by providing separate resources to law enforcement agencies.
Anonymous reports should be allowed,
and increased control of entertainment venues must also be introduced.
Action against one-time consumers should be two-staged.
For those convicted of drug use for the first time, an option that triggers legal sanctions, the "Second Chance" program, must be created.
Those who participate in this can avoid punishment with the help of professionals and their participation in useful social work.
Therapeutic work must play an important role in the rehabilitation of drug addicts.
At the end of the program, similar to the solution for housing, those who have undergone therapy should be returned to the open labor market in a half-way manner, in the first round through special, sheltered workplaces.
The current care system is not suitable for child and youth addiction treatment.
It should be possible to separate addicted minors from others in child psychiatry clinics,
and the separation of children from adults in adult addiction departments.
In addition, child psychiatric care must be provided in as many places as possible in the country.
3.9.2 People among the ruins
Although the Hungarian health system has been operating fully for decades, the coup de grace was given by the change of regime.
The decline was particularly spectacular in the years between 2002 and 2010, when health policy became a function of neoliberal economic policy.
Governments gave priority to profit-oriented solutions,
public health and prevention were neglected.
Jobbik's healthcare program, on the other hand, focuses on health preservation and disease prevention.
During the MSZP governments, there was a continuous withdrawal of funds from the health sector.
The cycles are unjustified hospitalizations,
was characterized by real estate sales suspected of corruption.
There was a desperate haste on the part of the government,
the public was being disturbed with ideas doomed to failure (e.g. visit fee, multi-insurance system).
During this period, the dramatic decline of the healthcare profession began
and emigration took on a particularly serious dimension,
which unfortunately has been going on ever since.
The waiting lists can also be dated here,
the appearance of increasingly frequent problems surrounding missed examinations and surgeries.
One of the government's important promises was to restore the health sector,
which he could have done with a two-thirds majority.
That's not what happened.
The errors of the predecessors have not been corrected
and accountability.
The lack of expertise represented a decline even compared to the previous administration.
With ill-considered and harmful measures (e.g. subversion of patient routes), they caused more and more chaos in addition to the existing ones.
The saddest thing is that the withdrawal of funds continued even after 2010.
The medicine fund was reduced,
the social security contribution was transformed into a tax,
the withering and closing of hospitals continued,
elimination of hospital beds.
In the midst of permanent downsizing, the campaign-like and modest wage increase was just a cosmetic patch,
moreover, primary care workers and nurses were left out of it.
From the perspective of twenty-four years, it can be said that the governments of the past are jointly responsible for the current situation of the health sector.
They did not have a feasible and correct concept, program,
and what is the biggest drama is that it is not today either.
It is a sad but characteristic moment that they did not even implement their own superficial public health program.
Money was taken from the health sector, referring to reform and reorganization,
and they caused more and more chaos.
From the point of view of society, the headlessness, degradation,
expensive medicines - our GDP-proportional pharmaceutical price subsidy is the smallest in the EU -,
overwork of doctors and nurses,
emigration and lack of professionals,
the backward and faltering equipment,
the waiting lists,
the tension and desperation permeating the entire sector.
Although the situation is extremely serious, the health sector is not insurmountable.
First, however, it must be stated that the problems of Hungarian healthcare are not primarily structural, but clearly financial.
In other words, what is needed from the future government is not another big reform, but the provision of sufficient resources.
And this requires political will,
on the other hand, a strong, revenue-producing economic policy that can widen the state's room for maneuver in the operation of subsystems.
We need a health policy that is willing to invest in health preservation,
to prevent diseases,
and in the effective treatment of patients.
According to macroeconomic calculations, next to education, healthcare is the most profitable investment,
therefore, its development is important not only from a social but also an economic point of view.
Society must realize that whoever produces or restores health is the same producer as the industrial or agricultural worker.
The healthier the society, the stronger the economy.
Health capital now has a value that can be expressed in money: the value of one quality life year is three times the GDP per capita, i.e. more than HUF 8 million.
Jobbik brings about this paradigm shift.
3.9.3 What we end
To underfunding.
When planning financing, it is necessary to switch from budget planning to functional planning,
in other words, the costs of creating and developing capacities, the return on invested capital, the replacement of used tools and materials, and the costs of maintaining and replenishing manpower must also be taken into account.
It must also be coordinated with the tasks of health preservation and disease prevention, which must be carried out by sectors other than healthcare (for example, education).
Without adequate budget funding, the care of patients will either be insufficient, or they will have to supplement it out of their own pockets (co-payment), relying on private insurance companies.
It is not possible to promise Western European standard care with African level funding.
ø Waste of resources.
The two-thousand-billion wrongful withdrawal must be returned to the health sector.
At the same time, the previously taken property must also be returned, using the building stock directly in patient care.
ø The lack of realistic planning.
In health care, in addition to underfunding, another serious problem is unpredictability from the political side.
Normal care requires stability,
therefore, it is necessary to plan for a longer period of time the levels of health care, the institutional and personal background corresponding to each level of care, the actual costs of the care, as well as the methods of developing health-conscious individual and community behavior.
Inequalities in care.
Health insurance should enable all people to have equal access to health-related services throughout their lifetime.
ø Uncertainties about health insurance.
In the future, Jobbik is also thinking about compulsory social insurance based on the principle of solidarity and a unified national risk community.
It is advisable to operate the system as a mixed maintenance (state, church, private),
but sector-neutrally financed, with very strong official pricing and control.
In addition to publicly funded services, any service provider can be profit-oriented, including the state,
but only for supplementary services.
Private insurance companies could also operate in the field of extra services and complementary medicine.
The health insurer must be independent,
but it can be strictly controlled and accountable.
And the social system must be completely separated from healthcare,
including sickness insurance as quasi-social care.
3.9.4 And what we solve
√ Assessment of the real health status of the Hungarian population
and continuous control.
The basic condition for saving healthcare is to be aware of real problems, real opportunities and real needs.
To put it stylistically: without a good diagnosis, there is no adequate therapy.
The health status of the Hungarian population must be assessed,
and individual, family, community and social needs related to health by age group.
Risks to health must be assessed,
and methods of risk management must be defined.
√ Strengthening prevention in public health.
Jobbik places the operational tools necessary for implementation at the center of its public health program.
These tools all serve effective prevention, because the nation's health can only be restored through health preservation and disease prevention.
And for this, it is necessary to create a high-level health culture.
Health preservation and disease prevention are basically a ministerial competence,
but at the same time, patients also have to take significantly more responsibility for their own health, treatment, and care.
The media can play an important role in educating and informing the population.
On the part of the state, we also assign a role to the health authorities in environmental pollution,
in the fight against unhealthy lifestyle and unhealthy diet.
√ The expansion of external sources.
The new jobs created through the nation-building economic policy expand the range of contributors,
as well as the expected improvement in the income situation.
The state must pay normative support for pensioners and those who do not pay contributions through no fault of their own.
A certain proportion of the excise tax on certain articles harmful to health (tobacco, alcohol) must be refunded.
Income from additional services outside the scope of social security,
and the revenues of the health industry, which contribute 8% directly and 40% indirectly to GDP, can also contribute to the expansion of financing sources.
√ Finding extra resources within the system.
By prioritizing prevention, significant costs can be saved
- with an appropriate health culture, some medical interventions could be avoided.
Unnecessarily ordered diagnostic tests, treatments, and drug prescriptions must be reduced.
Shortening patient journeys and optimizing care levels can also result in significant savings,
as same-day surgical and other interventions,
as well as a preference for day hospital care.
√ The budgetary security of healthcare financing.
In order to avoid wasteful expenses, the concept and exact scope of the health fund must be defined,
of the total amount received, what is the proportion spent on bureaucracy and how much is paid by the insurance company for current patient care.
Today, the collected social security contribution is simply a tax, which the state can use for any purpose.
This must be returned to the health sector so that it can only be used to finance care.
√ The distribution of screening tests.
It is necessary to determine which screenings, even if carried out for the population at risk as a whole, have a lower cost than the treatment of already developed diseases.
√ Strengthening the family doctor system.
In recent cycles, governments have treated the field of family medicine in a particularly step-like manner.
They probably appealed to the fact that the professional sense of the workers here overrides the effects of the unfairness related to them,
in other words, you don't have to worry about them, they - who come into the most personal contact with the patient - will do their job anyway.
This confinement to the coastline must end!
The professional, social and financial respect of the family doctor must be restored,
in addition to expanding the scope of tasks and intervention opportunities, providing a technical and continuing education background.
The role of "gatekeeper" and "patient manager" of the general practitioner system must be strengthened,
so that only those patients for whom this is unavoidable move to the higher progression level.
Professional strengthening of primary care is also necessary,
because this is relatively the cheapest care, and its development relieves the burden of expensive institutional care.
√ The spread of home care options.
Home can be the best possible environment for patients and the most conducive to their recovery.
The emotional and other sense of security can significantly contribute to the speedy recovery,
which can thereby also reduce healthcare costs.
Professional home care is not a well-recognized and supported part of care in Hungary today,
which Jobbik wants to change when it comes to government.
We are setting up a national home care network,
which we integrate efficiently and cost-effectively into the fabric of healthcare.
√ Making outpatient and inpatient care cheaper and more efficient.
Outpatient specialist care, including one-day care, must be prioritized.
The possibility of concentrating higher-cost services in health centers should be created.
√ Making ambulance and patient transport work more organized.
We will abolish the regionalization of ambulances by restoring the county organizational system.
State participation in patient transport must be made possible once again, by remedying the shortcomings of privatization,
thus ensuring better capacity utilization and more efficient management.
The construction and renovation of new ambulance stations and the expansion of the vehicle and instrument fleet are also necessary, as well as
such as the construction of helipads at reception sites.
Paramedic training, paramedic training
and expansion of the scope of competence is necessary.
√ The payment of risk allowances for paramedics.
Few people know that there is no risk allowance for the paramedics performing their profession in various emergency situations.
because of which the paramedics went to court.
But in addition, countless other outrageous problems hinder those who save lives on a daily basis:
paramedics have work clothes problems,
due to care deficiencies, they are often exposed to a direct risk of infection,
the winter tires of the ambulances are often not received in time.
If Jobbik came to power, it would change the current unfair situation.
√ Free dental treatment.
The state of dental hygiene in Hungarian society is alarming.
This is not just an aesthetic problem,
but can lead to serious complications,
and it certainly plays a role in the increasingly common oral cavity cancer.
Dental treatment must be made free of charge for Hungarians
excluding certain luxury services,
since bad, incomplete teeth are the cause of many diseases, the missed dental treatment is therefore paid elsewhere, more expensively.
√ Greater financial appreciation of healthcare workers.
The government's wage increase was only a symptomatic treatment of the problem.
So far, the healthcare sector has not collapsed due to the accumulated presence of overtime, second and part-time jobs, in addition to the love of the profession.
Today, without financial appreciation and a realistic life path model, leaving the career and the country is unstoppable.
The wage settlement of healthcare workers also makes it possible to eliminate the practice of gratuities.
Health workers should be exempted from compulsory retirement.
√ Modern health education and training.
Quality care cannot be imagined without adequate training and further training.
Within this, lay education (health promotion, health education, first aid, resuscitation without equipment for over 14 years) is envisaged as compulsory from kindergarten to high school graduation, included in the National Core Curriculum.
We are developing a vocational high school scholarship system in order to make the healthcare career attractive,
in addition to creating and operating a vocational training system that matches the needs of the labor market.
We plan to introduce community-based medical education,
in which medical students must participate in primary care,
which would also help with labor problems.
Finally, residency and specialist training can take place at the nearest training location of the candidate's choice,
and in others, its costs should be described.
√ The development of health informatics.
In addition to public health
health informatics is the area most neglected by previous governments.
Over the decades, a huge and valuable amount of information about patients has been collected in various institutions.
However, this information cannot be transferred between institutions directly,
local data cannot be connected in a single, common network.
This has harmful effects on all levels.
The various institutions do not see the information generated elsewhere about the patients they treat,
therefore, neither the patient journeys, nor the examinations, nor the applied therapies can be planned precisely.
Parallel examinations, treatments and drug prescriptions are unavoidable,
which not only causes significant additional costs,
but also impairs the effectiveness of the therapy, possibly endangering the health and life of the patient.
The three-level care (primary care, specialized care, hospital care) must be harmonized with a national networked IT system, especially regarding therapeutic recommendations.
In this way, patient journeys become traceable,
duplicate and unnecessary benefits can be filtered out.
At the same time, a large database is created for public health,
thus, instead of the extremely expensive public health monitoring, we get a significantly larger number and more accurate data.
IT developments can mean valuable and important orders for Hungarian IT companies.
3.10 Education policy program
3.10.1 Show me your school, I'll tell you who you will be!
Education is one of the social tasks that societies considered equally important regardless of age, geographical location and level of civilization.
Perhaps there are not so many clichés that have been said about the importance of education, from banal phrases to far-reaching ideas.
One thing is for sure, if we look at the schools of a community, we will see the future of that community.
Where school conditions are neglected,
where no energy is invested in its development,
where no sacrifices are made for the continuation of its operation, there is almost no chance of a better future.
It is no coincidence that for good parents, how many problems, difficulties, effort and attention are required to teach their children,
and this is not just about creating material conditions.
Hungarian education was a world-renowned system with long traditions.
Today, we are at a point where almost all that remains is the beautiful memory.
The devastation of the past decades is slowly turning Hungarian education into a museum piece.
In our country, the performance gap between schools and students is almost twice the average of OECD member countries,
the main reason for which was the continuous withdrawal of funds from the local government system.
The school performance of the students was basically determined by the financial resources of the settlement in which they continued their studies.
Fidesz had a legitimate reason to change this,
but with the unprepared and forced state maintenance, decision-making rights were also taken away from local communities, institutions,
and unclear powers cause serious problems in the daily routine.
While in 1990 spending on education accounted for 5.68% of GDP, the same proportion in 2009 was only 4.74%.
Between 2004 and 2011, the basic standards of public education continuously decreased.
Both the MSZP and the Fidesz governments saw a decline and deterioration in the quality of vocational training.
The MSZP abolished the three-year vocational training, mandatorily introducing the excessive 9--10. classroom theory training.
The Fidesz government is in favor of reducing vocational school training to three years
drastically reduced the teaching of general knowledge subjects,
which does not allow the acquisition of even the most basic knowledge.
The Regional Integrated Vocational Training Centers (TISZK) were created with a huge investment,
during which well-equipped and well-functioning vocational training institutions were abolished.
At the same time, vocational education was abolished in many schools,
at the same time, the tools were not transferred to the vocational training institutions,
and companies close to the party made a significant profit by selling the new devices.
The decline in quality has undermined the prestige of vocational training,
the performance of the majority of students is below criticism.
The majority of young people entering vocational schools do not have general skills either.
three-quarters of them are at the lowest measurement level in reading comprehension.
In vocational schools, the dropout rate is almost 30%,
almost half of the disadvantaged students who study here do not obtain a qualification, they leave the education system when they reach the compulsory school age.
With the introduction of the Bologna system
and due to the insufficiency of state funding, the standard of higher education has drastically decreased.
Governments leading mass education irresponsibly inflated the number of participants in higher education in such a way that
that the needs of the national economy were not taken into account.
During his administration, both Fidesz and MSZP set the goal of paid higher education and the introduction of tuition fees,
which is socially unjust,
and causes irreparable damage to the lives of the affected generation.
The second Orbán government advocated the indebtedness of as many students as possible through Student Loan 2, which is a mistake
and unfair.
The second Orbán government reduced state-financed training in a way that was not supported by any labor market reasons.
At the same time, there is under-training in many professional and scientific fields (e.g. natural sciences),
which means a shortage in the labor market.
The autonomy of higher education institutions has continuously decreased since 2005,
their economic independence was practically completely eliminated by the introduction of the chancellery system.
Many international and historical examples prove that all this is wrong.
For Jobbik, education policy does not only mean imparting knowledge, theoretical and practical preparation for life,
but also education.
In other words, we are not supporters of value-neutral education,
indeed, there are universal human values ​​that our children must be educated on.
At the same time, we also consider it to be avoided that under the guise of value-oriented education, the construction of political courses takes place in education.
The task of education is to raise people who respect and feel that the traditions of our nation belong to them,
they experience their work as a profession and a creation,
as well as sensible, conscious citizens of our country.
The state, the government, has a huge responsibility in this,
as well as teachers.
At the same time, we cannot expect teachers to carry out this task independently:
we need to find partners in families, churches, economic actors, the media and representatives of culture.
Jobbik's vision for the future outlines a Hungarian education system that is based on its own national,
drawn from Christian traditions,
standing on the pedestal of universal human values,
provides Hungarian youth with the most up-to-date knowledge possible,
who thereby become valuable at the same time
and competitive people.
We believe that even in today's fast-paced world that is losing its values, it is possible to give the community and the nation people who will enrich their country with their knowledge,
but at the same time they are able to distinguish between good and bad, value and worthlessness.
Those who are suitable for the condition of questions, i.e. for thinking,
who can take responsibility for things,
who preserve their own past and build their own future,
who are not dominated by the globalizing world,
but who, on the contrary, are able to control its depressing processes.
Our goal is to educate such Hungarian people.
People among the ruins,
who can build a better future.
3.10.2 What we end
ø The tug-of-war between municipalities and the state to the detriment of schools.
Jobbik envisages the maintenance of schools through close cooperation between the state and municipalities.
We ensure the survival of decently functioning foundation schools.
The disappearance of small village schools.
It is necessary to create the possibility for small local communities to keep or create their own small village schools,
the most important goal of this is to link the child to his primary protective community.
The two-level graduation system.
In 2005, the two-level graduation exam was introduced, which resulted in a deterioration in quality,
he educated the youth to be superficial.
Students encounter types of tasks that have nothing to do with life,
and also contrary to the logic of the subjects.
That is why Jobbik is abolishing the two-level baccalaureate, because it works against quality.
Graduation and admission are separated again,
giving the institutions the opportunity to organize their own exam.
We will restore the unified high school and vocational high school graduation system,
the purpose of which is to raise the standard of graduation and make it verifiable.
ø Forced, politically motivated school integration.
According to Jobbik's vision, instead of forcing integrated education at all costs, students with different abilities should be provided with parallel classes, the criteria of which are determined by experts.
Thus, in addition to normal classes, special support and socialization support classes could also operate.
The effective educational work carried out here enables the student's later integration.
ø School violence.
Deviant forms of behavior and school violence are severely sanctioned.
We consider the government's steps in this direction insufficient.
As a means of discipline and education, we introduce behavioral thresholds,
the most serious degree of which is expulsion from the school.
We eliminate the vulnerable position of the teacher,
he is given greater authority to take measures in the maintenance of class and school order.
A separate strategy must be developed for school drug use, which is reaching increasingly alarming proportions but remains mostly latent
and the spread of sexual violence.
ø Unworthy situation of teachers.
From 1989 to the present day, teachers' wages have never reached 80% of the earnings of those with higher education.
The proportion of teaching assistants in Hungary is about one-third of the OECD average,
thus, our teachers deal almost more with administrative tasks than with their educational work.
We offer teachers a real life path,
which is in addition to the salary increase reaching the graduate average
it takes into account aspects such as the time spent on the field, the acquired knowledge, the undertaking of additional tasks, the work performed in special conditions, the value added to the children's knowledge.
We take care of the continuing training of teachers in cooperation with higher education institutions,
which we base on the experiences of practical life,
for which the source is provided by the state.
We also promote the training of teachers who teach science subjects, which has become a shortage profession, with a special scholarship.
The education supervision system is organized in such a way that it fulfills its inspection function taking into account the local characteristics of the institutions.
Curtailment of university autonomy.
We reject the introduction of a chancellery system that practically eliminates the economic autonomy of the institutions.
3.10.3 And what we solve
√ Amendment of the national core curriculum.
Jobbik wants to enforce the state's role in education primarily in content regulation.
However, the Fidesz version of the National Core Curriculum does not sufficiently ensure the transmission of our national values ​​and traditions,
and does not prepare students for new challenges.
The framework curricula based on the new NAT bombard students with huge, almost unlearnable curriculum content,
while more and more of them are children struggling with integration, behavior and learning disorders.
Of course, we do not agree with the liberal educational approach that regards subject knowledge as almost unnecessary,
which was fulfilled during the government of the MSZP.
That is why we are shaping the content of the National Core Curriculum in such a way that all Hungarian children get to know the real history of our country and our writers who represent patriotism.
Already in elementary school, we reinforce natural sciences
and the role of IT,
and we teach them according to the age of the students.
The quality of textbooks is not determined by the exclusive role of the state,
but with strict regulation,
we ensure by consistently enforcing the approach included in NAT,
giving space to market participants who can meet this requirement.
√ The development of language education.
According to Jobbik, we must also pay special attention to language education,
because in this field we are among the leaders in Europe.
According to our ideas, Hungarian students in the general
and in secondary school they would learn two foreign languages ​​at a high level,
and starting from the fifth grade, the possibility of small-group language teaching frameworks must be created.
Obtaining the first secondary level language exam is supported by the state.
√ The network of boarding schools.
This is an effective solution for educating the separated parts of the Gypsy community to study and work.
In the boarding school, they would find themselves in an environment where they would receive a different, decent education,
which is the first step to their future prosperity.
The same is needed for those young people who cannot or do not want to fit into the normal institutional system of education due to behavioral problems.
The source is from the amount of the family support allowance of those concerned,
and we would cover it from the normative state contribution of dormitory education and care.
We would also involve the churches in the maintenance and operation.
During one government cycle, we set up one institution for the education of three hundred children per county.
We would obligatorily provide places for those children for whom the expert committee requires this.
√ Raising the compulsory school age.
Fidesz reduced the compulsory education age to 16,
until which date students cannot obtain a marketable profession.
Although this factor is overestimated in politics, since in the case of the previous age limit of 18, many were students only on paper,
Jobbik sets the compulsory education age at 17 years,
since this is the earliest time when a young person can acquire a marketable profession.
√ Effective vocational training.
To this end, with the involvement of the chambers of industry, we determine the range of professions in short supply and the expectations of the national economy,
after consultation with employers.
It is essential to make companies interested in practical training,
since currently only 2% of them participate in this in our country.
In order to more efficiently solve the maintenance costs of institutions, we involve students in vocational training in the maintenance of public institutions.
We recommend the creation of an instructor mentoring system or the creation of a workshop mentoring system aimed at the "reproduction" of quality vocational training instructors.
We also provide teachers with specialized further training.
Decisions related to the revision of the module systems by professional group are coordinated with the stakeholders.
√ Increasing state-funded higher education places in higher education.
A national government should not aim to get young people into debt,
in higher education, it is not the wallets of the families, but the talent and diligence of the students that should prevail.
That is why, according to Jobbik, the number of state-funded places should be significantly increased,
thus, the number of places with reimbursement decreases.
We provide a real and fair transition between the two forms of financing.
√ Revision of the Bologna system.
Jobbik eliminates the elements of the Bologna system that affect quality,
we are restoring college and university education of various natures.
In those training places where some majors exist only to have another reason against closure, we initiate real accreditation.
We forecast the number of students who can be admitted to each major for two years, so that young people can plan their future with confidence.
We adjust the number of training courses so that they meet all your labor market needs,
be in line with the needs and possibilities of all those participating in the education.
√ Maintenance transparency and security.
We clearly separate the amounts that can be spent on education and research,
and we encourage the institutions to earn their own income that fits their profile.
The state funding system must be reformed.
The maintenance costs of the institutions should not be covered by the large number of students.
√ Financial security of the students.
We want to significantly increase the amount of student allowances,
and within regulated frameworks, we will restore the note subsidy on the basis of need.
We also attract applicants to professions in short supply with higher scholarships.
We will push for local governments to support students studying teaching, pharmacy, medicine and library with scholarships,
who in return would start their work in the given settlement.
In addition, in order to curb the increasingly significant dropout rate, we only finance the studies of those students who exceed the specified training period by a maximum of two semesters,
otherwise, they must reimburse their costs.
We maintain the institution of the student contract,
agreeing with the principle that those who participated in state-financed training should later use the knowledge thus acquired in our country.
√ The career model of teachers in higher education institutions.
We create a career path in higher education for the instructors,
in which, in addition to the necessary but unreasonably forced academic progress of the instructors
the quality of the teaching activity is taken into account with greater weight,
and we assign motivating income categories for advancement.
3.11 Cultural policy program
3.11.1 Free culture, not freedom
For Jobbik, the protection and support of Hungarian culture is an unfulfilled obligation,
but much more than that: a national strategic task.
If the Hungarian culture is strong, we will be able to remain, not dissolve in the globalist world sea,
if not, we will surely disappear.
That is why Jobbik wants to protect and increase the traditional values ​​of Hungarians,
paying particular attention to both Hungarian traditions, both Turanian-proto-Hungarian,
both to the Christian-New Hungarian tradition.
We consider one of the most important spiritual tasks of Hungarians to be the harmonious living of our Eastern roots and our Europeanness at the same time,
which we also want to enforce in our cultural policy.
The foundations of the foreign policy and foreign economic doctrine of Eurasianism can only be built on the spiritual and cultural foundations of Hungarian Eurasianism.
Of course, this traditional Hungarian cultural policy cannot mean going back to the past.
For us, the past is not a goal, but a teacher and a source of life, which the generation of the given age must update again and again in accordance with its own life opportunities and living conditions.
Jobbik's cultural policy is open at the same time
and closed at the same time.
We are open to the freedom and effervescence of culture, the ability to display various points of view and the refreshing effects of artistic experiments,
but at the same time, we are strictly closed to any attempt that, by not taking advantage of the above opportunities, but abusing them, the national community, Hungarian traditions,
seeks to mock and provoke Christian and universal human values.
Artistic freedom cannot be confused with freedom
and by insulting the values ​​of others.
Turning to one of today's hit topics: while we acknowledge that some of our fellow humans have homosexual tendencies and lead a corresponding lifestyle,
against being discriminated against for this reason,
we consider efforts to promote homosexuality as a "cool" phenomenon to be wrong.
Acceptance cannot also mean claiming as a model.
Together with our education policy, we dedicate our cultural policy to the construction of a society that can remain human even among the ruins of this increasingly similar, decadent world that is losing its values.
To whom the words honor, decency, uprightness, chivalry, authority, courtesy, truth, faith and courage still mean something.
For this, however, it is necessary that those circles, communities and individuals who consider themselves or intend to be cultural mediators must possess these values ​​themselves.
but at least - knowing our human weaknesses and frailty - strive in this direction and lead society in that direction as well.
We have had enough of figures with disturbed minds and spirits trying to pathologically show their illness, deviance and trampling on values.
We accept that they can also create,
they can also claim attention,
but we will not waste the tax forints of the state cultural policy on this.
3.11.2 The sabotaged cultural struggle
The past decades have shown the complete opposite of the above right-wing principles.
Instead of the fundamental, socially and nationally valuable tasks of culture, the strengthening of a business-like, globalized approach prevailed.
There is a complete crisis of the domestic cultural institutional system, the withdrawal of resources
and as a result of ill-considered amendments to the law and regulations,
as well as due to the undefined tasks and expectations.
The real estate stock was destroyed on average,
its energy consumption is high and inefficient.
The art collection is hardly expanding,
our collections are in a bad, uncertain situation.
Our values ​​flow almost freely outside the country's borders.
However, the destruction of cultural policy was not only experienced from a structural and financial point of view,
but also in terms of orientation.
After the so-called system change, as a result of MDF's "velvet" transition, the leaders of the culture remained in the leading positions of the socialist system,
who suddenly became Western liberals from Muscovite communists.
However, the change was only apparently big, since even then, and now, this circle was really characterized by one thing: the national
and departure from Christian Hungarian culture,
its constant mocking, trampling and making it impossible.
Then, after the buds were snapped, they declared that there was no such culture,
that in its place there is only lack of culture.
The common sin of the governments after 1990 is that, regardless of political color, they constantly sought the favor of this left-liberal cultural circle
and with that he strove for the best possible cooperation.
From the perspective of 24 years, it can be stated that the Hungarian cultural struggle must finally be undertaken by a future national government.
The system change of Hungarian culture must be implemented,
and the current cultural "kadár youth" must be swept out of the key positions.
3.11.3 What we end
ø Culture becoming a luxury item.
Jobbik makes it the duty of the state to ensure broad access to national culture for those living in poverty.
Defamation of national symbols.
In the constitution, we protect our ancient national symbols, which have been undeservedly attacked in recent years, such as the Holy Crown, historical flags or the turul bird.
ø The loss of Hungarian art treasures.
The goal of Jobbik is to create a unified artefact registration system containing our national cultural assets for our ideological and material memories.
Introduction of supplier reward - for found antiquities.
Worthy presentation of the monuments of our cities with outstanding monuments from a Hungarian historical point of view,
international introduction,
priority support,
coordinated with the cultural strategy plans of local governments.
3.11.4 And what we implement
√ Independent and efficiency-driven support of the civil sector.
The civil sphere is the self-organization of Hungarian society,
we consider it of particular importance from the point of view of helping and partially taking over certain state tasks,
in the legislative process, we count on the opinion of the civil organizations involved.
We are reviewing the application and evaluation practices of the National Cooperation Fund (NEA) and the National Cultural Fund (NKA) in order to ensure that civil organizations instead of political connections
receive support based on their actual performance and the social utility of their activities.
For the NEA - restoring the previous funding system - we provide the unrecommended 1% of the personal income tax,
in this way, we will provide civil organizations with support for operational and professional purposes that is several times the current amount.
√ Worthy preservation of the memory of our historical greats.
Getting to know our historical greats,
the construction of the sacred resting place in Székesfehérvár worthy of the bones of our kings and queens originally buried in Székesfehérvár,
which helps convey the greatness of the kings of past ages, the importance of our former royal and sacred centers.
√ Szabadság square
and the dignified arrangement of Kossuth tér.
Restoring the original image of Szabadság tér in Budapest by moving the Soviet monument to a worthy place,
instead of the Hungarian Freedom and Independence Monument, which had been planned for a long time,
and by erecting the Relic Country Flag in its original place next to it.
The future Jobbik government will restore the '56 monuments, which were removed in 2013 under the guise of renovation, to Kossuth Square.
especially the volley of fire that claimed around a thousand deaths.
√ The Hungarian Institute of Prehistory.
The Finno-Ugric origin theory is now bleeding from a thousand wounds.
According to some, it can only be maintained on the basis of language and not kinship,
according to others, not even that.
"Where did we come from?" is an important duty for every nation. to give a reassuring answer to his question, but at least to look for it.
Since the MTA was unable to provide a worthy and credible framework for this,
the future Jobbik government will establish the Hungarian Institute of Prehistory to learn about our real prehistory, to support research aimed at it and to present its results.
We especially support our country's traditional events,
especially the largest of them, the Kurultáj.
√ Protecting the Hungarian language.
The Hungarian language is such an unfathomable value to us that we may not even be aware of.
which is still waiting to be discovered and re-evaluated.
Protection is not only important for cultural preservation
or because it is our mother tongue,
but learning and passing on the knowledge inherent in the Hungarian language also prompts us to do so.
We want to start the introduction of language protection measures.
We consider it important to introduce the Hungarian Language Act.
√ An opportunity for a new generation of artists to emerge.
Jobbik announces the creation of new, permanent scholarships for young artists.
A nation must be educated
a new generation of artists who respect their profession.
And for this, we need to create an environment where young talents see a perspective in their future, in staying in the country.
We are starting a State Art Management for them.
We are planning to provide special support to our young filmmakers, and to build a new, more transparent and cheaper application system.
√ The safety and transparency of the art world.
We provide health insurance to artists.
We want to establish the Chamber of Hungarian Creative Artists
and the Hungarian Performing Arts Chamber.
We want to introduce an art card, which provides health insurance for chamber members
and entitles it to participate in state tenders.
Furthermore, these professional organizations will be responsible for keeping daily politics away from artistic life.
√ The appearance of the patrons.
We want to help the establishment of private patronage.
For this, we provide tax incentives for individuals and businesses.
√ Valuable public collections.
Jobbik wants to increase the material of the public collections,
including their purchase.
When purchasing a Hungarian contemporary work from state collections, neither the artist nor the public collection will be taxed or charged.
√ Large-volume, historical-themed Hungarian films.
We wish to provide priority support for significant actions aimed at strengthening national unity and national self-awareness,
for the production of historical series and feature films showing the life of our Hungarian kings who set an outstanding and positive example in the nation's past.
√ National Traveling Theater.
There are many towns and villages where there is no chance of maintaining a theater.
The people living here are at a disadvantage in terms of access to culture.
With permanent employment of the best artists, Jobbik will set up a troupe and theater that will constantly tour the country and the Carpathian Basin,
to make high culture accessible to small rural settlements as well.
That is why we are setting up the Hungarian National Traveling Theatre.
√ The celebration of Hungarian survival.
We declare July 5, the day of the battle of Bratislava in 907, as a national holiday, on which day we remember that our Hungarian people, our nation, was able to win its survival even in the face of overwhelming force.
And with this, we are sending a message to both the present and future generations: the Hungarian people are not losers,
being Hungarian is a proud beauty.
3.12 Church political program
3.12.1 The crumbling Hungarian rock
Church policy must have two roles, which are fulfilled at the same time: provide the appropriate legal and political framework in which churches can freely carry out their religious activities,
on the other hand, help them so that their old social shaping role can unfold again,
and that their activities have a positive effect on public life as its active actors, "guardians".
During the transformation of 1989-90, no cross-cycle church political strategy was born.
The right-wing political forces, fearful and uncertain,
and the leftists approached church matters with a particularly harmful intention.
According to Jobbik, it is not possible to discuss church and religious matters only within borders,
in this matter too, a policy that thinks in terms of all Hungarians must be pursued.
Since the churches across borders are still the strongest holding forces,
and they have a serious system of relationships, they are extremely important from the point of view of building a Hungarian identity.
We consider it necessary that the reference to the Christian roots of our country and our culture should be emphasized in the new basic law replacing the previous constitution.
Christianity – even if we ignore its religious nature – carries extraordinary values ​​in itself and essential to human existence.
For Hungarians and Europe, the Christian tradition is the one that can ensure its organic connection to the universal human tradition.
Jobbik recognizes and appreciates the centuries-old social-building work of historic churches
and their resulting additional rights.
In order to further ensure the fulfillment of their social obligations arising from their historical privileges, we wish to provide them with greater state assistance in the future.
The question of supporting the churches has become the scene of continuous topical political battles,
the solution of the question cannot be postponed.
However, religiosity and church founding cannot be considered a business,
therefore, we wish to tighten the registration of churches,
and aspects of the continuous review of their operation.
We count on the cooperation of the churches in the integration of the Gypsies.
We consider the integration support service to be extremely important,
therefore, we will help the Christian churches in their mission to replace state funding based on positive discrimination, which is contrary to the interests of the Gypsies
based on the real internal characteristics of Gypsies,
perform a service trying to solve their problems also through religion.
We are establishing more effective cooperation between the government and the church leadership, which enables a quick joint response to the problems that arise in society.
We are initiating the establishment of a ministerial position without a portfolio so that requests that also affect the churches can be included in the work of the government as soon as possible and with an appropriately high-level representation.
3.12.2 Crimes of past government cycles
Where the governments did not respect the existing agreements between the state and the churches,
and where they openly betrayed
because every government forced the churches into financial dependence.
The assessment of the social utility of churches has significantly worsened,
and a view developed according to which the state only distributes alms to the churches.
Religion is the most personal public matter.
Under the liberal slogan of "religion is a private matter", after the regime change, pseudo-religions and pseudo-churches that are religious in nature, but are actually specialized in making money, mushroomed.
These formations claimed the same rights as the historical churches,
while they did not take their share of social obligations at all,
and not in one case specifically social
and engaged in anti-national activities.
The liberal view would discredit the historic churches,
made it worthless from the point of view of social construction,
the effectiveness of their institutional system was questioned.
Spiritual care was not present in an adequate way and to the extent of the execution of the sentence
and in hospitals.
The priceless church real estate was almost doomed.
A prominent crime is the 2011 Church Affairs Act of Fidesz, through which it became completely a function of the political lobby to decide which community can be a church and which cannot.
For this reason, the Congregation of the Faith rose to a "historic" rank.
3.12.3 What we end
ø The political vulnerability of the churches.
We are introducing a new church affairs law based on real values,
which eliminates the amazing practice of the parliament representatives deciding on the matter of communities engaged in religious activities.
By eradicating this incompetence, a clear picture should finally be created.
We are tightening the registration of churches,
and we constantly monitor their operation.
Instead of actual political battles and making the churches impossible, Jobbik is planning a clear, orderly church financing that is acceptable to both parties.
ø The Church of Faith becoming a political-power factor.
We do not wish to persecute any religious community,
since Jobbik stands on the ground of religious freedom.
This is also true for the Church of Faith.
We do not wish to restrict any religious activities,
on the other hand, we will take away its "historical" status, which it owes to the bad church affairs law and political lobby and not to its socially positive existence.
3.12.4 And what we solve
√ Supporting the operation of historic churches.
We recognize the prerogatives of historic churches,
these are confirmed by state and inter-church treaties.
We support the social-building, charitable and educational activities of the churches.
We assign a special role to historical churches in the integration of Gypsies,
and for this we provide adequate state assistance by establishing a Gypsy Mission Fund.
With regard to historic churches, Jobbik initiates the creation of "Vatican Treaty-type" basic documents
and their full compliance.
We initiate the conclusion of similar contracts with Hungarian historical churches across the border,
helping the preservation and strengthening of the Hungarian communities there and their aspirations for self-determination.
√ State recognition of the church wedding.
We ease the administrative burden on couples getting married by making the church wedding also an official state marriage with the presence and cooperation of an appropriate civil servant.
√ Pastoral presence in places that require it.
The execution of the sentence,
the national defense
and we increase the presence of chaplains in the area of ​​hospitals.
√ Monument protection and reconstruction program.
We are launching it in order to protect real estate and monuments belonging to the church.
We are extending this program to the institutional systems of Hungarians beyond the border,
and around them we organize cultural centers that strengthen the Hungarian identity.
3.13 Media policy program
3.13.1 The fourth branch of power
Due to outdated regulations, the shortcomings and loopholes of the Media Act were regularly abused,
the objectives of the law have not been achieved.
The sector has become the playground of the bipolar political elite,
a sign of this is the appropriation of frequencies for friendly businesses,
the development of the "one-party system" in supervision,
and not using the opportunities provided by the existing law for international pressure.
The common sins of previous governments are embodied by the presence of media oligarchs,
the outflow of advertising billions from the public sector,
as well as the strengthening of anti-national media tendencies.
A serious downward spiral of public service took place under the nice-sounding but even more dangerous guise of "value neutrality",
thus, it is practically impossible to define and account for the characteristics of the basic information service.
Competing and divisive public media were created,
which the Fidesz government placed under serious political control,
and he failed to be accountable: to this day, we cannot see behind bars the embezzlers of state media assets, those involved in the headquarters case, the principals and agents of the scandalous consulting contracts.
Regarding the commercial media market, previous governments can be blamed for selling out the Hungarian media,
and instead of professional goals, they appeared as a sick pursuit of top ratings and extra profit.
As a result of the complicit silence of the media authorities, a significant part of the media lost their moral and professional credibility.
However, some of people's needs are influenced and controlled by the media, thus fundamentally defining the functioning, system and goals of our society.
Undemanding and irresponsible content,
meanwhile, the weak state presence is causing more and more serious damage.
3.13.2 What we end
ø For political media monopolies.
Our goal is to create real media pluralism,
and against the dictatorships of opinion, we will begin to establish decent media relations.
We are establishing a parity supervisory board.
Jobbik's solutions are therefore logical: we apply anti-monopoly measures,
then we will prioritize the rise of local actors.
We speed up the digitization process,
thereby promoting freedom of information
and the emergence of diverse political opinions.
ø The dilution of child protection principles.
Well-functioning, top criminal
and we are introducing news quotas beyond the lower limit.
We feel it is important to develop a support system for children's programs,
the development of a new child and youth protection media strategy.
ø Abuses of the state advertising market.
We limit this market to public service media and state-owned advertising platforms.
We maximize advertising spend across the entire public sector.
The money spent on government orders suspected of party financing will be recovered after that.
ø Waste under the guise of public service.
We will hold accountable those who cause billions of dollars worth of damage.
We organize the transparency of organizations operating with public funds.
ø For pseudo-esoteric money-sucking shows.
We pursue an activist, interventionist policy with clear goals.
We will remove from the screens those soothsaying and esoteric programs that abuse the freedom of religion and conscience and the trust in media providers to extort money from television viewers.
3.13.3 And what we solve
√ Fair media market.
We are creating a media market that is suitable as a whole to fulfill both its entertainment and informational functions,
meanwhile, he does not forget his basic tasks and obligations.
√ Advertising tax.
By introducing the band advertising tax, we create a new source of income,
we put an end to the exclusively profit-oriented approach.
Advertisements would be classified based on their social utility and certain content characteristics.
The more favorable category would result in a lower special tax for the customers.
We support the display of public service and valuable content with tax relief and subsidies,
we crack down on violations of the law immediately and with the greatest possible severity.
√ The real public service.
Since we see the role of public media as important in creating and preserving national unity,
we ensure that, in addition to public policy goals, professional aspects are also enforced in the public media.
We make control and practical powers clear,
we create the possibility of social supervision over the MTVA as well,
that is, we provide the Public Service Board and Public Foundation with a say in the control of the production process of public service content.
√ Limiting the power of the Artisjus.
Artisjus and other joint rights management and rights protection organizations are currently involved in the criminalization of users and server operators,
and sees the solution in the disproportionate taxation of hospitality and tourism businesses,
rather than adapting to established market conditions.
These organizations are controlled by a narrow interest group, which pays out the collected royalties in a non-transparent manner.
According to Jobbik, therefore, the significant reduction of the current deadline for legal protection cannot be postponed,
and that the full freedom and support of Internet file sharing systems as neutral technologies is realized,
and in this context, illegal downloads and pirate sites should be eradicated.
√ Free mobile internet.
We consider it a milestone opportunity that the fourth, with the planned state takeover of the mobile frequency, opens up an excellent opportunity to introduce free internet.
The target group of this can be mostly families with children living in the villages of small rural, impoverished regions.
The basic reason is that in the case of the poorest quarter of the population, the lack of geographical habitat and high earnings causes a serious inequality of opportunity,
therefore, the life chances of those living in this circle must be improved in this way as well.
However, this is not the case when an average Hungarian household costs more than HUF 40,000 annually to access the Internet.
In addition, 86% of households have a desktop computer and 56% have a laptop computer, which means that the necessary devices are mostly available,
but they still don't have the option of an internet subscription.
In addition, the free internet also supports finding and settling in the labor market.
Our other argument is that through internet administration, the state saves money (fewer offices have to be operated),
avoiding personal administration even reduces the load on rural, typically inferior roads,
and since the state is currently planning to enter the mobile communications sector, it will in all probability be able to provide those in need with mobile internet access below the market price with the new frequency at its disposal.
3.14 Youth policy program
3.14.1 The hidden resource
Hungarian youth do not need loans, aid and alms,
but to opportunities so that he can prosper in his own country by making use of his inherent abilities.
Moreover, this is not only in his interest, but also in the interest of the entire country.
Jobbik therefore wants to give Hungarian youth life goals and opportunities to achieve them instead of the current, all-pervading uncertainty.
A radical change, a change of attitude, is necessary if we want a country where dealing with the fate of the youth is not "just another policy".
rather, it represents an important duty that is essential for the future of the nation.
The key to the survival and development of our nation is to educate our young people in the right spirit and manner.
We need generations that see learning and decent work as the only possible path to individual-community social prosperity,
and in which a suitable attachment to their national identity and traditions develops.
We are convinced that every young Hungarian is talented in something.
We must discover these talents in them,
and we must do everything so that they can be developed.
Quality education for Hungarian youth,
secure and predictable future,
social security
and we want to create the possibility of creating our own existence.
In recent years, we have witnessed a level of emigration exceeding all previous levels,
hundreds of thousands had to go abroad because they could not find an opportunity at home to start their independent life in a way worthy of their abilities and diligence.
It is the fault of the political elite of the past more than two decades that talented and decent young Hungarians have not found prosperity in their own country.
Jobbik considers it an extremely important task to stop this process,
that the youth find their calculations at home,
and those who had to leave should be able to return home as soon as possible and in as large a number as possible to a country that appreciates them.
For us, the Hungarian youth is both the hidden resource of the nation and a gift from God.
3.14.2 What we end
ø Obstacles related to job opportunities for young people.
Nowadays, finding a job is a big problem for people of all ages.
For the middle-aged, it is because they are already difficult to retrain
or because companies don't want to pay them,
for young people because they do not have the experience required to fulfill the task.
This is when the logical question arises for many, if I can't start working, how can I gain experience?
Jobbik will create laws and an economic environment where people of all ages can find satisfactory work,
and within that also the young people.
This is why the Seven Leaders Plan set the creation of quality workplaces as an overarching goal.
With this, we want to prevent further emigration of young people.
ø The housing difficulties of young people.
In addition to the difficulties in finding a job, the other important root cause of the emigration of young people is the lack of prospects for independent housing.
Jobbik's home creation program aims to change this situation.
ø Indebtedness of young people.
We must return to the original purpose of the student loan, so that this type of loan is a help only for the most needy young people who cannot complete their higher education studies without it,
which can be used with an interest subsidy.
Instead of one-sided marketing, which is only intended to present the benefits, information that paints a realistic picture and honestly presents the consequences and dangers of the loan is needed.
Many problems related to student loans should be investigated,
and the causes of this must be eliminated so that young people do not associate an institution under government jurisdiction with scams.
3.14.3 And what we solve
√ A youth policy that can be calculated and planned.
The previous governments had in common that during times of austerity they preferred to withdraw money from youth policy goals.
To stop this, Jobbik would record, for the sake of predictability and planability, that a fixed percentage of the current budget serves as cover for specific youth policy goals.
√ The creation of the Youth Act.
Since its foundation, Jobbik has been emphasizing the need for a youth law.
If we get into government, we will immediately set about creating it - at the request of a broad social dialogue.
√ Real and effective advocacy.
The independence of the National Youth Council (NIT) from the current government must be achieved and the financial conditions necessary for its operation must be ensured!
√ Preparing students for the world of work.
In order to introduce career options and make the decision more conscious, based on the Austrian example, we make it mandatory for the 7th and 11th grades to attend a once-a-week class called "further education information", which helps students to realize their abilities and ambitions.
Based on the Slovenian example, we are planning to start a project whose goal is to present the professions in real terms and introduce them to young people (mainly the professions that are in short supply, together with expected wages and employment probabilities).
We would strengthen career guidance based on the Portuguese model,
and we would organize school trips, factory visits, and professional consultations, during which you can find out who is interested in what and what suits their personality.
√ Development of work experience and skills.
Following the example of the Maltese Job Shadowing program, it would allow a young person who is about to choose a career to be assigned to a worker for a week to see what it is like to fill the given position.
Based on the Dutch model, on the one hand, we would provide support for young people to find employment in occupations that are in short supply, and on the other hand, in sectors where there will be a labor shortage due to retirements in the near future,
thus, the elderly will have the opportunity to pass on their expertise to the young.
Jobbik would strengthen the relationship between state companies and other companies that correspond to the majors of higher education institutions, so that the internship represents a truly relevant professional experience.
The provision of practical places should be encouraged with contribution discounts, as in several European countries.
In order to strengthen internships after completing studies, it is necessary to establish collaborations between the largest private companies and employment centers, following the example of the Swedish Young Potential Program, to provide 3-6 month internships to newly graduated students.
√ Support for young entrepreneurs.
In order to improve the rate of young entrepreneurs, which is very low compared to the European average, Jobbik initiates a stronger introduction to the entrepreneurial way of life in secondary schools and the presentation of successful businesses and entrepreneurs as role models,
as well as permanent support opportunities for young entrepreneurs
and the support of organizations able to provide them with professional assistance (e.g. FIVOSZ).
An important task is to reduce the fixed, administrative burdens of start-up businesses
and in order to help their introduction to the market, the so-called support for the creation of incubators.
√ Simplifying location.
It is necessary to rethink and expand the current employment contribution benefit for young people, because with modifications, this method could help young people find employment much more effectively.
√ Student work free of abuse.
In order to whitewash student work, which is the only help for many, and to eliminate retribution, we are tightening the controls related to student work,
free legal aid,
create quick action groups.
Within the framework of secondary school education, an informative lesson on basic student worker rights and obligations must be held.
In case of employment, students must be given a publication clarifying their rights with the given employer.
We are clarifying the legislation related to student employment.
Until the completion of their higher education (first degree), all students – regardless of whether they are passive or active students – can undertake subsidized student work.
Workplaces that frequently and seriously violate students' rights,
and student cooperatives are excluded from the system providing tax and contribution discounts.
√ Modern language education
and sponsored language exams.
Statistics comparing European countries in terms of language skills show a sad picture of our country.
But not only these, but also the tens of thousands of people whose diplomas cannot be accepted due to the lack of a language exam, clearly shows that there are serious problems in this area.
Language learning should not mean learning spelling rules,
but the transfer of speech-centric knowledge necessary for everyday prosperity, which young people really need.
Jobbik wants every young person to have a state-financed exam fee for an intermediate type C (or equivalent type A and B language exam).
Higher education institutions should provide free language education up to the level of the language exam required for the diploma.
Like many European countries, we should also have more movies without dubbing on television, because it can be shown to help language learning.
√ Network of youth referees.
Increasing the number of youth officers with appropriate professional qualifications and strengthening their network is essential to improve the situation of young people in the settlements
and solving their problems, thereby keeping them in place.
√ Valuable cultural programs.
In the case of theaters and exhibitions, increased state support for tickets for young people is essential (not only for students, but for all young people),
and that worthwhile leisure programs are advertised in public education, vocational schools and higher education institutions.
√ Demanding and safe entertainment options.
The so-called creation of youth centers in as many settlements as possible, which would enable young people to spend their free time in a useful and demanding manner as a kind of community space.
In order to ensure safe recreation opportunities, Jobbik recommends that on Fridays and weekends, the area around entertainment venues should be secured by the police with a special presence.
√ The support of the Scout movement.
One of the largest and best-organized youth organizations in our country is a representative of such a system of values ​​and provides such spiritual and physical education to young people, on the basis of which priority support of the organization is a clear duty for Jobbik as well.
√ Local youth representation,
youth municipalities.
Jobbik considers it a goal to establish youth self-government in as many settlements as possible,
this body of young people should be created, so that they can assert their interests better through this,
as well as being active in public life and gaining experience.
√ Encouraging volunteering.
In order to encourage volunteering, young people must be provided with benefits that entitle them to valuable free time discounts, which motivate them and they will choose to participate in voluntary work on their own.
√ Facilitating placement.
It is necessary to reconsider and expand the current employment contribution benefit for young people, because with modifications, this method could help young people find employment much more effectively.
3.15 Environmental protection program
3.15.1 A taboo falls again
The Jobbik national party,
and - avoiding all breast-beating, but firmly - we believe that green thinking and strong national politics are not the opposite,
on the contrary, they are a condition for each other.
Only those who love, appreciate and respect the land where they live can come up with a truly harmonious and authentic environmental protection program.
its past, culture and society, i.e. those with a national mindset.
The time has come to break with the Western lie that environmental protection is a left-liberal privilege.
Moreover, it is time to point out the shallowness, wildness and lack of credibility of both European and domestic left-liberal green movements.
It must be said that behind these movements, in most cases, the superficial search for adventure and purpose in life by bored upper-class youth
or the industrial lobbies that use them as tools.
We, people from the right, love the Carpathian Basin, our country
and we love our nation, the Hungarians,
and from this it directly follows that we are the most determined fighters for the protection and harmonious shaping of our environment.
After we have defined our role in environmental protection, there is one more important principle that needs to be clarified.
One of the differences between modern man and traditional man - before the industrial revolution - is the relationship with the world and nature.
As long as traditional man lived in the world, as an integral part of it,
until then, the man of today was separated from it, alienated from nature,
and consequently sees it either as a commodity or as an enemy to be defeated.
In both cases, he wants to rule over nature,
while in earlier ages he lived in harmony with it.
At the time of the harmonious existence, the connection and interaction between man and nature was clear.
Today, this knowledge has been lost, which is how those superficial and tragicomic movements appeared, whose leaders and members are full of left-liberal clowns and confused figures.
Drawing on the ideas of the deep ecology and consciousness ecology movement, Jobbik's basic environmental protection principle is that only healthy, healthy and harmoniously conscious communities are capable of effective green politics.
3.15.2 Wallet
Turning now to the situation of environmental protection in Hungary, it can be said that all previous governments have treated the area as a stepchild,
in multi-party governments, the portfolio was usually given to the smaller coalition partner as a high-profile but weightless area.
After this, it is not surprising that, instead of taking meaningful action, the sector is used as a source of revenue for the central budget (fines),
on the other hand, they were treated as the hen that lays golden eggs for money that can be obtained through corruption (EU grant funds).
They tried to hide the helplessness with codification,
therefore, the legal regulation of the area is excessively complicated and opaque,
there is a lot of administrative burden
and there are few rules that really protect the environment.
Neither the left-wing nor the right-wing governments knew what to do with the illegal waste dumping and the organized criminal groups that carry out the disposal of hazardous waste in a mafia-like manner.
Water affairs and water management were limited to flood protection only,
there was no such responsible owner of the area who would have tried to solve the other side, the water retention, quantity and quality protection.
As a result, the country suffers billions in damage every year.
In water diplomacy, governments have often failed miserably,
and in the case of Hungary, where since Trianon 95% of surface water comes from abroad, this is a key issue.
Instead of effective climate protection and energy efficiency measures
Successive governments have gambled on revenues from business-based carbon dioxide allowance trading,
while the residential, industrial and service sectors also operate extremely wastefully.
So there is a lot to do that awaits the future Jobbik government.
3.15.3 What we end
ø For illegal landfills.
After joining the EU, our country increasingly became the destination country for various illegal waste shipments.
This question is also a very good indicator of our colonial fate,
because the reward for a society that provides cheap labor and then buys foreign finished products is that dangerous substances are also poured down its neck.
Jobbik announces zero tolerance towards illegal waste dumps,
whether the perpetrator is domestic or foreign.
ø The danger of red mud.
We will start the liquidation of the red mud reservoir cassettes in Hungary,
we make the extraction of the metals in them economical with state means.
- To the water diplomatic paralysis.
We create water diplomacy,
we will renegotiate the concluded bilateral water agreements with our neighboring countries in accordance with our national interests.
We will stop and in the future exclude the transfer of public water facilities to private hands,
the previously privatized facilities will be returned to state ownership and management.
We are creating a law to protect our surface and underground water resources, to ensure that they are kept in Hungarian hands.
We are sitting at the negotiating table with the Slovak side in order to implement the judgment in The Hague related to Bős-Nagymaros in order to maximize our national interests.
ø Corruption in the field of environmental protection.
We review contracts related to the construction of regional landfills and the reclamation of old landfills, where the fees stipulated in the contract by the main contractors are often 10-50 times the fee paid to the subcontractor.
We review the fulfillment of the environmental protection commitments of the privatization contracts,
and in case of default, we will enforce the performance by legal means.
We will also examine the utilization of funds spent on environmental remediation,
and the reality of the performance behind them.
3.15.4 And what we solve
√ Selective waste collection.
In waste management, we offer free residential selective waste collection.
We reduce the communal fees,
waste types whose material cannot be used are used for energy purposes.
√ Environmentally conscious thinking.
We strengthen education for environmentally conscious behavior in all educational programs,
both in state-controlled public media.
√ Creating the country's water retention capacity.
We develop a complex strategy for the utilization of our river waters,
of which the Danube–Tisza canal is a part,
as well as the construction of the dams necessary to achieve this.
We increase the water retention capacity,
we improve the efficiency of agricultural irrigation,
shipping conditions
and we produce cheap electricity
with maximum consideration of ecological aspects.
By the way, we are creating more than a hundred thousand jobs with all this.
√ Preservation of the wealth of our aquatic life.
We restore the wildlife of our natural standing and flowing waters,
we will deal with poaching.
We are creating the conditions for the restoration of floodplain management with a thousand-year-old tradition.
√ Strong animal protection.
We will create an independent animal protection administration within the Ministry of the Environment, separate from animal health.
We will eliminate the phenomenon of stray animals.
We support alternative methods that replace animal testing.
Animal fights, especially dog ​​fights, which are incredibly widespread in rural settlements, will be eradicated with the strictest sanctions.
√ More conscious energy management.
We support energy production based on domestic mineral resources
by validating environmental aspects,
using the best available technology.
With state support, we encourage the energetically independent, so-called the spread of passive houses.
We advocate the spread of local energy supply systems based on renewable energies (biomass, sun, wind, geothermal) in order to introduce the model of energy-independent settlements.
In order to utilize the electricity at night, we support the construction of a pumped-reservoir power plant,
which stores the energy produced at night by the Paks units, the Danube and Tisza hydropower plants for the period of peak consumption during the day, thus reducing the amount of more expensive imported electricity.
Investments that increase energy efficiency are given priority over investments that do not have such a return.
In freight transport, rail is more environmentally friendly and much more energy efficient
and we support the spread of water solutions.
3.16 Consumer protection program
3.16.1 You are what you eat
Consumer protection plays an increasingly important role nowadays.
In some parts of the world, it has become one of the most important points of conflict for political debates.
While, through global capitalism, the money- and profit-centered economy embraces the globe almost unhindered,
while modern-day exploitative chains are being created between different regions and countries of the world,
while the virtual circulating capital swelled multiple times over the real economy,
meanwhile, there is also another process with the opposite sign.
Human-centered thinking appears, which considers production, consumption, and profit not values,
but man himself with his dignity and divine creation.
Even if consumer advocates are not always aware of this.
According to Jobbik, domestic consumer protection is in an embryonic state in many respects.
On the one hand, there is no culture of this attitude at home,
the Courage level of the civilian is very low.
On the other hand, the vulnerability of the country does not provide a favorable climate for expanding self-conscious and attentive quality of life.
In the end, the political leadership and the previous governments did nothing to strengthen society in this regard.
They mistakenly saw it as some kind of protest, which made them afraid of their political power,
instead of mobilizing social forces to aid their own political ends.
Of course, this would have required positive objectives...
3.16.2 What we end
Overloading of special taxes.
Half a dozen sectoral special taxes complicate the situation of the Hungarian population, for the simple reason that a significant part of them is passed on to them.
This became clear about the banking sector tax already a few weeks after its introduction,
but even the price of the special telecommunications tax appeared among customers, due to the increase in the prices of other types of services.
The transaction tax was just the icing on the cake, by which our taxed income is taxed again and again, when repaying loans, but also during transfers to savings accounts.
It is the fault of the current government that no mechanism prevents the transfer of special tax types,
and the cabinet also does not allocate enough budget resources to the control organizations, such as the financial supervision merged into the MNB and the GVH.
Serious sanctions must be imposed on banks that burden their customers through a transfer method, yet for reasons of tax avoidance, by increasing monthly fees, credit card fees, and transfer costs.
In this way, they can take billions from people with almost imperceptible small amounts.
In order to prevent this, Jobbik calls for the establishment of a monitoring system,
which would not only examine what amounts are transferred by banks,
but would also sanction them if necessary.
ø Anomalies around Hungarians.
The so-called When defining and describing "Hungarian products", exemplary strictness and punishment must be applied.
Zero tolerance must be applied, i.e. there must be no foreign ingredients in Hungarian products.
In addition to serious market protection, a strong marketing campaign must be organized around Hungarian products,
to spread Hungarian products both in the West and in the East,
and to make the issue of the quality of our food a social issue.
- in order to remove shoddy, unhealthy products from the Hungarian food market
Currently, thirty-four trademarks are known that indicate certain goods and groups of goods as domestic or Hungarian.
therefore, a unified system must be created.
The regulations created in this cycle help the situation to some extent,
however, some brand names and product groups could still be misleadingly placed on the shelves.
In order to avoid this, it is essential to amend the trademark law
and review of tickets already on the market,
also sanctioning abusers.
3.16.3 And what we solve
√ The introduction of the social bank account.
We would introduce it for low-income pensioners and low-income earners.
We would exempt the accounts of people living in difficult queues from all kinds of transaction costs, account fees,
thus, people in need and workers could maintain a bank account almost for free.
The idea would typically help the poor and the middle class,
thus, citizens earning less than HUF 200,000 would be able to use it.
The social bank account would ensure the use of basic services.
In addition, we are initiating a review process that would examine the composition and justification of the outrageously high bank costs affecting employees in all cases.
√ The creation of the Rural Bank.
Savings cooperatives were arbitrarily nationalized by the government majority.
In principle, this would give the state the opportunity to implement the Bank of the Country concept, which Jobbik proposed back in 2010.
but the privatization plans revealed since then revealed that this was not the political intention.
Jobbik restores the independence of savings cooperatives by amending the law,
by ensuring adequate capital, financial guarantees and loan placement expertise
in order for rural farmers, entrepreneurs and private individuals to get sufficient and cheap credit.
√ Serious consumer protection fines.
The current practice of consumer protection supervision does not have a deterrent effect.
The course and system of fines should be changed in such a way that the levied amount is determined in proportion to the net sales revenue, which could start from 1-2 percent and reach up to 50 percent.
It must be achieved that tens of billions of fines are also in sight,
which really have a threatening weight for multinational companies.
As a result of this, Jobbik has already implemented an amendment from the opposition, as a result of which ten times the previous maximum fine (two billion forints) can be imposed on multi-companies
– this can define what companies who abuse the trust of customers can expect from us.
According to our ideas, those who continuously break the rules may have their operating license suspended - for up to 30-60-90 days.
At the same time, it is essential to check that the penalized companies do not transfer the amount in question to their employees in any form.
Jobbik aims to clean up the market,
and keep only those who are able to follow the rules of the game that are healthy from a national economic point of view.
√ Children's meal package.
Jobbik has a ten-point solution program that it developed together with catering and dietetic organizations.
This includes banning school vending machines,
encouraging the use of healthy food ingredients made from domestic raw materials instead of convenience products that are harmful to health,
increased use of honey instead of sugar.
In addition to these, it is necessary to set up groups of specialists who will help in working out the correct diet composed of locally available ingredients.
It is an important plan of ours to introduce conscious forms of life education for children,
and develop their sense of taste and their attitude to health, for example by visiting farms or factories, so that they can get to know where and how their food and ingredients are made.
√ Setting up a family support service.
Those who have children should have cheaper access to basic food
and school supplies.
As part of this package, not only vegetables and fruits would arrive at the gates without price increases,
but also a package of textbooks received at entry price (or free on the basis of real need).
√ Spreading consumer protection culture.
We consider it essential to introduce financial and consumer protection education,
already in the upper grades of elementary school.
3.17 Tourist program
3.17.1 Start on a road!
Tourism contributes to 9% of domestic GDP,
nevertheless, the tourism-hospitality sector receives an unworthy stepfather treatment from the government.
Even without high mountains and the sea, Hungary could be one of the European strongholds of tourism,
could provide work for hundreds of thousands of people.
We are talking about an area that has great potential for development even if we do not provide it with additional resources.
This requires "only" a safe, clean, orderly, smiling Hungary.
If the resources provided to support tourism were awarded solely according to professional considerations, in line with community interests, then tourism would not only be the custodian of stopping our economic downfall at the level of words.
Tourism and hospitality can provide a secure livelihood to a wide variety of businesses, all of whom could significantly contribute to our economic growth
– only in a different legal and mental environment.
Within all sectors, the wages of workers here are the lowest,
is below two-thirds of the national economic average,
which is not a good motivational condition.
None of the member states of the European Union, which is constantly referred to as a reference, has such a high general sales tax as in our country.
At the same time, tourism and restaurant businesses enjoy huge VAT discounts in many places.
By reducing the VAT, more money could remain with businesses,
we could ease their plight by taking the step
the reduced tax rate could also lead to a decrease in consumer prices, which would result in an increase in turnover.
Jobbik aims to strengthen domestic tourism in Hungary at the same time,
and at the same time become one of the most popular destinations for international tourism.
Whether it's because our lakes, rivers, healing waters, our lowlands, our wines, our brandy, our food, our forests, our equestrian traditions, our historical monuments, our folk culture, our village tourism, or anything else attracts you here,
go home so that you definitely want to come back here.
Hungarian tourism has to stand on more than one foot due to our diverse features,
and you must dazzle your guests with your magical offerings.
Everyone needs to be aware that as long as people live on earth, they want to eat, drink, rest and have fun - and not always at home.
Recognizing this fact keeps countries at the top of the world tourism rankings,
where we could get there with a radical change of attitude.
3.17.2 What we end
ø The lack of inhibitions of Artisjus.
Artisjus - the Hungarian Copyright Office Association - supports businesses primarily involved in tourism and hospitality along amazing principles and practices.
The royalties charged by Artisjus ignore the actual turnover of the unit,
the pricing method is completely opaque to an average business.
The fee they collect every month for a switched-on television is slowly becoming unsustainable for a small catering unit that is hardly visited.
ø The HACCP system.
The operation of a system that is justifiably hated by caterers - even with its subsequent mitigations - is an unsuitable or unnecessary tool for creating food safety.
The use of NASA's method developed in 1959 for the safety of food for astronauts is unwarranted when countless enforced laws guarantee the order of food transportation, processing, and storage.
Operating the system entails such a daily administrative and regular financial burden that it is already at the expense of efficient work,
therefore, its use should be discontinued.
ø For high certification fees.
The classification and uniform classification of the various accommodations is justified,
however, in the case of non-hotel-level accommodation providers (guesthouses, apartments, campsites), the certification fees are very high.
These represent a financial burden for businesses that live primarily from rural tourism, which they find difficult to manage.
The upper limit for determining the procedural fee for the rating organizations - both in proportion and in amount - is set by law.
ø Unreasonably harsh penalty practice.
The tight budget figures have triggered an unprecedented wave of forced fines by the various authorities.
The inspectors, who are not infrequently also financially interested, are able to finish off a business in one season,
the tax authority also assumes and uses an unrealistic amount of estimated sales revenue during its fine raids.
It is necessary to ease the official stranglehold on the profession.
3.17.3 And what we solve
√ Simplified employment of hospitality workers.
Hospitality workers cannot be included in the scope of simplified employees,
thus, in contrast to those who work in agriculture and tourism, employers cannot hire them on favorable terms due to their seasonal nature.
The occasional increased traffic can thus often only be served by forced relocation,
which is at the expense of quality.
√ Creation of a national airline.
The negative impact of Malév's bankruptcy on tourism and hospitality is incalculable,
even though some of the canceled flights were taken over relatively quickly by some other airlines.
According to Jobbik, a national airline is needed.
A national airline should never be examined to see if it was profitable on its own,
but what added value it created within the country's tourism sector,
and what kind of tax revenue the sector itself, together with other service activities, produced for the state,
and whether the sector was profitable overall.
Tourism alone can support an airline.
In Europe, it is difficult to find an airline - Malév's size, not low-cost - that can be operated profitably on its own.
√ The development of controlled consumption.
The Széchenyi leisure card and various meal vouchers aim at controlled consumption,
however, regardless of the needs and possibilities of average employees, the state voluntarily determines the possibilities of use, for example, in the case of the SZÉP card, the extent to which the three "pockets" (accommodation, hospitality, free time) are topped up.
The current paternalistic economic policy does not take people's real living conditions into account.
√ State, strategic support of medical tourism.
Since our country is known worldwide for its medicinal waters, medicine is also at an advanced level, and it is no coincidence that medical tourism has become an independent branch of the sector.
Due to Congo's empty health fund, only rich people have the privilege of using the services of resort medical centers,
for the others, after several months of waiting, an opportunity of modest quality opens up.
The heavy responsibility of the previous governments is that they left medical tourism only for the wealthy,
the door to healing and health preservation must be opened for everyone.
√ Strengthening the market role of domestic raw materials.
The strategic goal of Jobbik is the qualitative and quantitative development of Hungarian food production.
In light of this, it is an important task to guide caterers to domestic products during their procurement of raw materials with administrative tools.
√ The diversity of the tourism sector.
Jobbik supports all tourism trends that meet special needs (hunting, equestrian, conference, gastronomic, religious, etc. tourism),
however, in terms of their government support, none of them can be dominant, nor can they grow blatantly at the expense of the other.
3.18 Transport policy program
3.18.1 Social extreme sports
Since the governments of the past twenty-four years have not been able to show a single area after all this time in which they could be called successful, it is no wonder that transport policy can also be classified as one of the losers of the system change.
Motorway constructions can apparently create the illusion of development and modernization,
but in addition, the modernization of lower-order roads was not completed,
and the majority of people use these roads to go to work, to take their parents to the doctor, or to take their children to school.
Today, there are countless roads in Hungary that are life-threatening
and the renovation of which has been postponed for years.
If someone takes a look at the roads around Mátra today, which can be said to have a high tourist load, they might choose a different excursion destination next time.
Of course, if you find good quality roads…
And we can go on with the missing list.
The implementation of navigability on the Hungarian section of the Danube has not been completed,
bus and rail vehicle production, which produces for both the domestic and export markets, is in crisis,
it ran only to replace scrap instead of modernizing the transport vehicle fleet,
modern parking systems have not been developed.
The number of accidents is high due to heavy road traffic,
the causes of which include not only drunken driving, speeding or driving that does not meet the environmental conditions, but often road defects as well.
On an international level, but especially compared to ourselves, there is a spectacular lag in the transport of our country,
which is most worrying in the field of public transport.
This disadvantage for everyone in the technical level of the vehicles,
in the incoordination of line connections,
daily experience in the accident-prone state of the routes,
to improve which the successive governments intervened only out of compulsion and even then at the level of firefighting.
Due to the lack of strategic thinking, public roads have become congested,
at the same time, the railway systems lost their role due to their neglect,
while the transport features of our rivers were not even formulated at the level of possibilities at the decision-making levels.
As a result of the situation, it can be concluded that Hungary is gradually at a disadvantage internationally due to the slowdown in transport,
thus, the systems for conducting international traffic were implemented through the neighboring countries.
At the same time, it can also be established that the devices operating today are outdated and slow
and their operation involves significant circular pollution,
which is not even acceptable according to internal requirements.
Therefore, it can be stated that during the last 24 years, the transport systems belonging to the national assets have been destroyed,
and the rest is dominated by lack of management and disorganization.
Therefore, for Jobbik, transport policy is not merely an economic activity that generates income,
but it is also a strategic, public administration, environmental protection and public welfare issue, which we therefore want to fix by treating it together.
The basic element of this is public transport, which we must start on a national level.
In this, we intend for the railway to play a decisive role in distributing the load
and the development of water transport.
3.18.2 What we end
ø Congestion of public roads.
Jobbik will act not only in words, but also by taking concrete political measures in order to partly divert the road traffic, which has often become unbearable, to the railway
and for river transport.
By creating a stimulating economic development,
less irritating to social tranquility
and a harmonious balance in transport that takes into account aspects related to the protection of the environment.
ø For dangerous public roads.
We transform locations classified as danger zones and make them safe.
In order to protect pedestrians, we are tightening the relevant rules,
we are establishing several secured pedestrian crossings with installed camera systems.
We are increasing the establishment of routes bypassing settlements.
We prioritize the development of the 2x2 and 3-lane road network.
We reduce freight traffic on public roads by tightening the regulations,
the social costs caused are incorporated into the rates for transit traffic.
We develop and implement a usage fee system derived from the operation and traffic data and the balance of the background costs of the service.
We are creating a national information system, indicating the condition of roads, renovation works, notifications, development and maintenance plans, as well as traffic and accident statistics.
ø The rampage of dangerous drivers.
We take stricter action against drivers without a driver's license, under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
In order to obtain a professional driver's license, in addition to the basics, extraordinary driving technical knowledge,
furthermore, we require the existence of a successful test according to the specifics of the application (for priority urban traffic).
Crimes endangering rail traffic.
We declare the entire area of ​​the railway to be an extremely dangerous operational area and therefore a closed area based on property, accident and life safety aspects.
Traffic crimes, metal and cable theft are dealt with drastically.
We strengthen the railway safety service with experts,
regionally, we are establishing a separate railway investigation department at some police headquarters.
We increase the accident prevention safety at the intersections of the railway and the public road,
and, if possible, eliminate the level crossing of these nodes.
3.18.3 And what we solve
√ The complex development.
Infrastructure development and construction of railway tracks in a complex approach, in accordance with actual traffic needs
we will have it done in coordination with the road developments.
We continue to build the high-speed rail network,
which will be system-level suitable for transporting people and goods.
This in itself reduces the load on public roads.
√ Incorporation of railway operations into the entire traffic circulation.
When modernizing stations and hubs, we require bus connections within the system,
as well as the development of modern, environmentally friendly parking facilities for individual vehicles.
√ Preservation of the railway network
and development.
We are speeding up the electrification of the lagging regional exploration railway lines,
and we include them in the national system.
Using modern IT systems, we adapt the timetables and the frequency of flights to regional needs.
In the agglomeration areas, in the light of the development of the strategy of the agrarian country, we will examine the need to build railways and sidings that provide connecting links,
and make it suitable for running modern domestic, energy-saving, environmentally friendly motor trains.
We preserve the traditions of (forest) railway transport for leisure time.
√ Restarting vehicle production.
We will examine the possibilities of the domestic motor train, suburban train and electric system vehicle production in general together with the development of the training, and we will restart them.
√ The reorganization of Hungarian rail freight transport.
We will review the official, registration and track use fees,
proportional to the costs.
We support the operation of existing and planned industrial parks by building sidings.
With the establishment of new terminals and in new conditions, we will restore the combined freight transport of domestic interest in order to relieve the burden on the public road.
In order to reduce the burden of road freight transport, we are improving the conditions of rail transport in combined container transport,
we are expanding the number of reception places,
we improve the conditions of access,
we ensure system protection.
We assess and, as necessary, develop the possibilities of domestic container production,
thus helping the economical mode of transport and relieving the burden on public roads.
√ Returning the rank of railway training.
We will restore railway professional training, supply, career model, uniform and rank allowance.
We are raising the railway professional higher education to such a level that it is considered a state-recognized higher education.
Those who participate in the professional training with a study contract are guaranteed a job at the end of their studies.
√ The military-strategic infrastructure of the railway will be restored in order to help the national defense and disaster prevention.
√ Unburdening the cities.
Among other things, we are speeding up the construction of the expressway with a modified route, connecting the Western Transdanubia with the eastern part of the country and passing over the Szekszárd bridge.
√ Boosting water transport.
We implement the navigability of the Hungarian section of the Danube,
and develop the railway and shipping infrastructure at the ports of call for the full range of logistics services.
We will initiate the construction of a multi-purpose artificial channel connecting the Danube with the Tisza,
which solves problems related to irrigation and drainage,
and also becomes suitable for shipping purposes.
With the means of retaining water, we create a direct connection between water transport and complex water utilization.
We establish a direct link between water transport and water management.
We take care of the construction of previously destroyed internal drainage channels,
maintenance of existing ones.
3.19 Sports program
3.19.1 Apathetically healthy body?
The last governments have continuously reduced the resources to be used for the maintenance and usability of state-owned sports facilities, for their renovation to prevent deterioration, and for essential investments.
It is typical of all previous cabinets that state sports properties were privatized at low prices after they were demolished,
which made life and leisure sports impossible,
and significantly shortened the national wealth.
The number of active sportsmen decreased every year,
and this is exponentially true for the role of children in sports.
The experience and interests of the sports community were ignored,
at the same time, the financing system was not designed along sports interests,
with this, they prepared for the fact that from the nineties to the present day, the number of sports associations registered in the competition system - and thus the opportunities for sports - has drastically decreased.
Sports tourism was not developed,
the possibilities inherent in this were kept at the level of the turn of the century,
thus from significant, long-term sources of income,
they deprived the country of a living space for sports financing.
The Ministry of Sports was abolished,
then the ministry overseeing sport was demoted to a state secretariat.
Sports medicine has not been modernized,
sports medicine was operated only in an incomplete administrative manner.
The rising rate of pharmaceutical care of pensioners was noted without an alternative preventive measure that can be defined through sport:
they did not want to intervene in sports areas for the protection of their health.
Even in the current cycle, it is typical that the oligarchies belonging to their power courts have been given sports properties owned by the state and municipalities for asset management and operation free of charge or for a fraction of their value.
Meanwhile, the sports law was amended more than a dozen times,
in several cases also modifying the modification, which gives a true picture of their thoughtless haste.
Approaching the failure of some sports exclusively from the point of view of sports safety, fan registration was introduced to criminalize visitors to matches in order to register, list and easily punish fans with a mostly nationalistic sentiment.
Daily physical education, which should otherwise be supported, was hastily introduced without serious preparatory work,
behind the amount, the appropriate resources were not created, neither from a human, infrastructural, nor financing point of view.
Seeing the ineffectiveness of their haste, as a communication trick, they promised physical educators, trainers, and sports professionals the development and introduction of the career model on several fronts,
however, they have not been able to implement this satisfactorily since then.
They have still not succeeded in creating a sports medicine and doping control system that provides an adequate answer to the problems of the time,
so the sport continues to struggle with its serious illnesses.
A joyful new system was introduced, the corporate tax subsidy of spectacle team sports
- which is an initiative that benefits the Hungarian sports supply and will be continued -,
however, this narrows down to just five team sports.
The support system was not extended to the development of physical culture in kindergartens,
for competitive youth sports
nor for college and university leisure sports programs.
In addition, unfortunately, there is also the suspicion that through this support not only and not primarily sports receive funds, but also corrupt political operations are taking place.
3.19.2 What we end
ø The negative media presence of sport.
For the media, not the negative manifestations in the sensationalist, tabloid distortion,
rather, it must play a prominent role in presenting the values, opportunities and positives of sport,
therefore, in order to create positive values ​​for everyone, we will transform the role of the media in sports with the involvement of the stakeholders.
ø The fan registration.
We will abolish the relevant parts of the law dealing with "pseudo-sports hooliganism" on the registration of law-abiding fans, which pre-criminalizes fans with a largely nationalistic sentiment.
3.19.3 And what we solve
√ Creating a development program.
Although the ideas are given at lower levels, the renewal of student sports life is progressing painfully slowly,
there is no comprehensive government guarantee for the implementation of reforms.
In the spirit of long-term strategy, economy and efficiency, we are putting the National Sports Facility and Infrastructure Development Program on new foundations.
As part of the development program, we assess and categorize the sports facilities in the country.
Within the support of competitive sports, we are expanding the programs that take care of supply,
in this way, we will reduce the burden placed on the parents of sports children in recent decades.
√ The Carpathian Basin Youth Olympics.
This also promotes the development of a closer relationship between young Hungarians living here and across the border,
and the cross-border boom of student and student sports.
√ Cleaning up the support system.
We will continue to develop
freed from disproportionality and abuse, we continue to operate the system of state tax support,
that it serves Hungarian youth training and the success of sport in its entirety, with all its parts.
We want to put the system, which is currently operated with minimal control, on a more efficient and stable basis by redistributing tasks, powers and responsibilities.
The gambling monopoly must also play its part in supporting the sport.
We pay attention to the appropriate distribution and targeted use of grant funds.
A large part of the "hamburger tax" revenues from Fidesz - taken over from Jobbik - is used not for the treatment of diseases, but for their prevention, prevention,
we translate it to sports.
√ Restoring the governmental power of sport.
Instead of the deplorable State Secretariat, we are creating a strong governmental background for the world of sports.
√ Streamlining school physical education.
With the involvement of teachers, trainers and sports instructors, we not only continue to develop everyday physical education in schools,
rather, we exclude vaguely formulated and unverifiable substitutability,
and we are creating a background model of physical education and education that will form the basis of the future, which combines the Hungarian physical education method and the school sports model and club life based on Anglo-Saxon traditions.
√ The possibility of lifelong physical education.
We see kindergarten sports as necessary
and embracing sports for pensioners:
with a mandatory number of hours, developing age-specific professional materials, making playgrounds suitable for this,
by expanding the sports and recreational opportunities of pensioners according to their age characteristics.
Jobbik is developing a support system to support kindergarten sports and pensioners' sports,
the basis of which he wishes to provide through the voucher system.
√ Establishment of regional centers.
We create regional supply and vitality centers,
where, in addition to providing the opportunity to practice sports
we deal with the training of professionals,
with modern sports medicine,
by imparting knowledge of a healthy lifestyle on a wide scale.
√ Modernization of the sports health system.
In order to make the sports medicine supervision of our student athletes more stable, we are creating a national sports registration and sports health (online) system,
which provides managers and coaches with direct contact with sports doctors,
and, in addition to starting the joint professional activity, they can access the specified sports medicine life path data of the competitors.
√ Sports-oriented drug prevention.
With the involvement of civil organizations, we are developing a program to educate young people about drugs,
for crime prevention through sports,
and to curb doping.
√ Expanding sports opportunities for people with disabilities.
We expand the sporting opportunities of young people with disabilities,
we create the conditions for sports activities that can be carried out in retirement.
√ We raise sports diplomacy to a higher level.
Not only its importance in sports,
but also because of the national economic benefits expected from the event, we set it as a goal,
that Hungary organizes a European football championship, either as a co-host or independently.
3.20 National defense program
3.20.1 Domestic shipment
The Hungarian Armed Forces are responsible for the protection of the territorial, infrastructural and civilian population of Hungary.
It is often referred to as an "army" in public discourse.
The Hungarian Armed Forces has undergone significant changes since 1989,
what the previous governments all call reforms,
and is interpreted as a transition from a mass army to a professional, professional army.
In fact, the Armed Forces fell victim to the economic policy that went wrong and made mistakes after mistakes.
All this resulted in a significant loss of ability.
In 1989, the number of the National Guard was still 106,800.
That same year, the government decided on a 25% reduction in personnel, with the slogan that "the people's army must be transformed into an international force and the dislocation made uniform."
On March 12, 1999, Hungary was admitted to NATO.
In November 2004, the Parliament amended the constitution regarding the suspension of conscription,
from then on, the staff of the Armed Forces in peace consists exclusively of contract soldiers, professional soldiers, civil servants and civil servants.
In 2004, Hungary joined the European Union, which requires a common appearance in regions outside of Europe that is compatible with the goal system and specific measures of the common foreign and security policy.
A parliamentary resolution passed in 2006 sets the number of Hungarian Armed Forces at only 23,950.
In the current cycle, the entire system defining the foundations has changed in the field of lawmaking.
The principles of the new National Defense Act contain positive elements,
but minimal parts of its implementation can only be felt at the Ministry of National Defense.
The new legal status law is overregulated,
contains only obligations, prohibitions on the exercise of civil rights,
shows no vision for the future.
It does not even refer to compensation or financial recognition.
Jobbik did not even accept it.
The new track model remained at the desired level.
It leads nowhere neither materially nor morally.
There is some vague hint in the direction of public service,
which cannot be implemented for objective reasons.
The new national military strategy is anything but national.
All defense activities are discussed only in the federal system (NATO, EU).
We pay the price of a cooperation assumed in the future in the present and in reality, in distant, expensive missions that do more harm than good to our nation.
The existence of advocacy organizations operating in the army is only formal,
their expression of opinion is confined to the field of labor law at most,
they cannot exercise professional influence.
The fate of national defense management was determined by the budget withdrawal.
The magnitude of 0.78% of GDP not only does not ensure development,
but caused further staff reductions and property losses.
Without the rescheduling of international payment obligations – Grippen repayment – ​​even the remainder would be inoperable.
The human condition system is at the mercy of the budget.
Undertaking a contractual service is for lack of a better option,
the reserve system of 1-2 thousand people is operated by tax enforcement,
the professional staff was reduced by another 1,200 people in 2012.
There is no national defense training or preparation.
The training of those who choose a military career is not targeted at any level.
The size and composition of the armed forces fall far short of the minimum requirements for the defense of the homeland.
The number of deployable, fighting soldiers can be increased to 4,500-5,000,
it barely reaches 10% of the need for peace.
Two nonsensical views alternate: "everyone in the army should be a deployable soldier!" (cook, accountant, storekeeper, maintenance worker, etc.).
The other: "Where the work can be done by a civilian, let's abolish the military status, because the civilian is cheaper!"
The task system of the national defense has been stripped bare during the last 20 years!
Only one important thing remained, the execution of federal tasks with about 1,000 people.
The other tasks were assigned to a new, unnecessarily created organization – counter-terrorism, protection against disasters
- or we don't talk about it - hinterland protection, border guarding - so it doesn't exist.
The army's personnel, infrastructure, equipment, and task system have continuously decreased since the regime change.
The termination or liquidation was not based on sane, needs-based calculations,
but as an idea, according to the decisions of the reigning power.
Professional reasons were never accepted.
The four years between 1998 and 2002 were the most intense period of the destruction of national defense.
when more than 30 military organizations were abolished,
the number of employees was reduced from 93 thousand to 45 thousand,
they smashed the army's command system.
Taking stock of the past 24 years, it can be concluded that while a third Hungarian conquest would be necessary,
in the field of national defense, they were committed to giving up the country.
3.20.2 What we end
ø Underfunding of the area.
In the field of national defense management, the 40-30-30% ratio must be implemented (personal benefits, maintenance, development).
The current budget share of 0.81% of GDP, fixed until 2016, means the complete collapse of national defense.
Here in Europe, only Latvia spends less on national defense.
Individual countries perform this task varying between 1.6 - 6%.
ø Participation in international missions serving political interests.
Hungary also takes part in international missions whose justification and truth can be questioned, to put it mildly.
Jobbik puts an end to the slavish attitude of selling Hungarian soldiers,
and with this we give up our discretionary options regarding participation in international missions.
3.20.3 And what we solve
√ The independent viability of the Hungarian Armed Forces.
The entire national defense system must be rebuilt
and military capability by relying on Hungarian industry.
Planning must be done independently of federal systems (NATO, EU).
√ The necessary legal environment.
The obligations laid down in the National Defense Act must be enforced in all sectors with the "transferred" national defense experts.
The legal status law must be amended in such a way as to promote retention with regard to personal benefits, continuous motivation throughout the career, a flexible, optional pension system, and a new military strategy built on one's own national forces.
√ Expert group for national defense protection.
In the field of advocacy, a group of military experts - partly appointed and partly elected - must be established, without whose approval the basic defense capabilities cannot be changed.
√ Voluntary military training.
National defense preparation and military training are the basis of the human condition system.
The future Jobbik government will also provide voluntary military training for the age group specified in the National Defense Act - men aged 18-40 - for a period of 2-3 months.
We will create the legal background for those participating in voluntary training to receive discounts and help in their subsequent training and employment, in consideration of their sacrifice.
√ Increasing the number of the army.
The magnitude of the defense force can be determined with appropriate, objective calculations, based on the geo-strategic position of our country and a presumed land offensive force.
As a result of the above, an air-supported land force of around 80-85 thousand people, equipped to the standards of the time, is needed to defend the country,
which, in terms of readiness, consists of 45,000-50,000 people in peacetime and 30,000-35,000 short-term reservists.
According to the task: retreating around 50 thousand people, hinterland around 20-22 thousand people (Hungarian Guard, civil guard), military leadership and public administration and logistics around 8-10 thousand people.
√ Redefining the task system of national defense.
Unnecessary dualities must be eliminated.
The social acceptance of the national defense must be restored.
The unified military administration system must be established both at the national and county level as an element of the general administration.
Civil defense and border guard should be made part of the army.
The army's separately regulated emergency services must be involved in public order tasks.
Thus, the main tasks of the army are: the armed defense of our country against all external attacks,
detection and prevention of terrorist acts,
preventing hidden migration,
the planning, organization and implementation of national defense preparation and military training,
implementation of the planning and organization of protection against disasters, including other professional organizations,
participation in the performance of public safety tasks,
finally, the well-thought-out performance of the tasks stipulated in international agreements.
3.21 National political program
3.21.1 We are of one blood
National politics, the fate of Hungarians abroad, has appeared as a particularly important area in our politics since our establishment.
We have always considered those Hungarians who did not renounce belonging to the motherland, but were deprived of it by history, as our Hungarian brothers and sisters as important as the Hungarian citizens living in the truncated country.
We feel responsible for all Hungarians.
For us, this was a natural duty arising from within,
and will remain so in the future.
Ever since Jobbik entered the Parliament, the fate of the separated Hungarians suddenly became more important to everyone.
It was necessary.
The socialists caused lasting damage to national politics,
however, Fidesz did not realize the turnaround it had announced.
Although some important and welcome decisions have been made,
there are areas where the difference between the current and previous governments is barely perceptible.
The MSZP pursued compromising, back-to-the-wall, servile diplomacy with an emphasis on "good neighborly relations", Fidesz on the "importance of dialogue",
Jobbik, on the other hand, considers the interests of the Hungarians living in our separated territories to be the primary aspect of the neighborhood policy.
The system of state subsidies granted to Hungarians living abroad must be completely reviewed,
the amount of resources must be increased,
and strengthen the transparency of distribution.
A cross-border economic program must be developed,
domestic companies to invest abroad, to create jobs,
thereby encouraging the economic strengthening of Hungarian communities.
Prejudices against Hungarians abroad must be dismantled,
the national unity of Hungarians should be an important value for the next generations.
The national political approach must also influence education, culture, the economy and the media.
3.21.2 What we end
Unconditional support for EU integration.
We only support the Euro-Atlantic integration of Serbia and Ukraine if the Hungarian national communities living there are given the widest opportunities for self-determination.
In the case of Serbia, we expect a full investigation of the anti-Hungarian atrocities from 1944 (including the period of the South Slavic War).
We demand the release of the Temerin boys who are still in prison,
erasing the collective guilt of the three Sajká villages,
proportional support of Hungarian-inhabited settlements by distributing central funds without discrimination,
furthermore, we expect strong official action against all anti-Hungarian acts.
We consider the extension of the powers of the national councils a condition for joining the EU,
as well as the constitutional guarantee of the elements of self-determination provided to the Serbs of Kosovo for the Hungarians of the Southern Region.
In the case of Ukraine, we require compliance with the language law,
the establishment of a Hungarian-majority administrative region along the Tisza,
with anti-Hungarian atrocities (desecration of monuments, damage to Hungarian inscriptions, disruption of holidays),
and action against the anti-Hungarian activities of Svoboda and other extremist Ukrainian organizations.
ø For atrocities against Hungarians abroad.
We are establishing fact-finding committees to investigate major atrocities against Hungarians living abroad (e.g. pogrom in Marosvásárhely, police attacks in Dunaszerdahely).
Through interstate negotiations, we provide financial and moral compensation to the victims.
We will examine the possibility of compensating those displaced from the Highlands, as well as Hungarians who remained in their homeland but were illegally deprived of their properties by the Czechoslovak authorities.
We will enable the Hungarian Legal Aid Service of the Carpathian Basin, established at the suggestion of Jobbik, to provide free, fast, efficient and professional assistance in the event of violations of the individual and collective rights of Hungarians living in our separated territories.
ø For problems related to preferential naturalization.
We are increasing the number of people dealing with the administration of preferential naturalization,
we will shorten the current procedure, which takes up to one year,
we reduce the costs of issuing passports.
We review naturalization applications rejected on the grounds of "national security risk".
An extensive mafia industry has developed in Ukraine and Serbia so that unauthorized persons can obtain Hungarian citizenship
- these reactions are strictly investigated.
We investigate and publicize abuses related to the issuance of Hungarian identity cards,
with particular regard to Transcarpathia.
We provide a one-time free opportunity to exchange Hungarian personal documents in which individual personal data is in a foreign language.
ø Disturbances of subsidies.
Hungary spends only one thousandth of its budget to support Hungarians living abroad, who make up nearly a quarter of the nation.
We will gradually increase this amount to half a percent by 2018.
We make the operation of the Gábor Bethlen Fund (BGA), which manages foreign subsidies, transparent and predictable,
we will review your activities so far,
we detect abuses.
We involve relevant foreign Hungarian organizations as well as the parties of the Hungarian Parliament in the distribution of subsidies for national political purposes,
we award the funds according to real merit and not party political considerations.
3.21.3 And what we solve
√ An independent ministry.
We are setting up a Ministry of National Policy to deal with the problems of Hungarians abroad in a comprehensive, unified, strategic basis,
and for the consistent enforcement of national considerations.
Among the most important goals of Hungarian foreign and national policy, we define the support of the self-determination aspirations of the separated Hungarian communities and their success.
We take the most decisive action against neighboring countries restricting the use of the Hungarian language,
and against his laws and measures adversely affecting Hungarians.
√ Protection status.
For Hungary, this makes it possible for Budapest, as Austria did for South Tyrol, to turn to international forums with even stronger legitimacy in the event of grievances and violations of law against Hungarian communities abroad.
√ The modern border crossing.
We are modernizing and expanding the border crossings in order to facilitate the contact of Transcarpathian Hungarians with the motherland.
we will reduce the waiting time.
√ Targeted and fair support policy.
We will increase the amount of education and training support for Hungarian children living abroad after enrolling in a Hungarian school, unchanged for almost a decade and a half,
and in addition to the parents, we also provide an equal amount of support to the schools.
In order to avoid abuse, we review the eligibility conditions,
and we check the use of grants granted to institutions.
We will return the Hungarian discounts taken from Hungarian teachers abroad.
When compiling the list of institutions of national importance, we apply professional aspects instead of political considerations,
we take into account the opinions of all members of MÁÉRT.
Within the BGA, we are creating a special youth framework for targeted support of young Hungarians living abroad.
We also provide a separate source for our Hungarian brothers from Csangó.
We help the establishment of sister-settlement relations between Hungarian cities and villages in the motherland and abroad,
strengthening the existing ones and filling them with real content.
Within the BGA, we also create an independent source for the establishment of cooperation between sister schools, sister churches, sister institutions and sister organizations.
We will increase state support for class trips abroad,
so that every Hungarian child can really visit our national brothers and sisters living in our separated territories at least once.
We support so that more Hungarian students from abroad can reciprocate these visits than at present.
We consider the activity of the Hungarian Youth Conference, which unites the Hungarian youth of the world in a unified umbrella organization, to be of particular importance,
we will once again involve its representatives in the process of distributing foreign subsidies,
we will double their budget support.
We are creating an application and scholarship system to support the operation and acquisition of equipment for Hungarian media and press abroad,
and to help his colleagues.
√ Economic development plan.
We prepare a Hungarian economic development plan for the Carpathian Basin filled with actual content,
which lays the economic foundations for the reunification of the nation.
We support the expansion of domestic companies abroad with tax incentives, government orders and other means,
investment in Hungarian-inhabited areas.
The conditions for this are as follows: employment must be linked to the knowledge of the Hungarian language, thereby significantly contributing to the reduction of high unemployment among Hungarians everywhere;
make their headquarters in a Hungarian-inhabited area, and thus help the growth of a Hungarian settlement with their business tax;
support Hungarian organizations and institutions with their tax percentage;
also ensure signs and inscriptions in Hungarian.
We are committed to improving the transport conditions of Hungarian-inhabited areas,
that all Hungarian regions are connected to the motherland by electrified railway lines and highways.
In connection with compensation cases that have been going on for decades, we establish interstate commissions of inquiry,
and we explore the compensation practices of neighboring states, as well as their results.
We demand from Romania the still unclear settlement of the affairs of the Transylvanian public domain.
√ Supporting research for national policy purposes.
We support the work of the National Strategic Research Institute.
We consider it an important task to map the economic situation and needs of the Hungarian-inhabited regions of the Carpathian Basin (natural and economic geography, development directions, opportunities for Hungarian-Hungarian economic cooperation, training structures, shortage professions),
the creation of knowledge repositories,
assisting in the search for possible application sources and development grants.
√ The development of Hungarian education.
We demand the establishment of independent, accredited, Hungarian-language higher education financed by neighboring states,
and the independence of the Hungarian departments of the Marosvásárhely University of Medicine and Pharmacy.
We also provide Hungarian student ID cards for Hungarian students abroad.
We will examine the possibility of accepting the Székelyföld Student ID card in Hungary.
We are taking the initiative to have a permanent Hungarian quota for public administration and law enforcement majors in neighboring states.
We facilitate the mutual recognition of diplomas and degrees.
Based on the Hungarian model, we oblige foreign higher education institutions operating with support from the mother country to
to provide student governments with an independent and sufficient budget,
and the elected student leaders should be awarded public scholarships.
In cooperation with Hungarian higher education institutions abroad, we also advertise part-time scholarships for students from the mother country, which can be used in addition to the Erasmus program.
√ Book distribution in Hungarian.
We support Hungarian book publishing abroad
and the modernization of the library network.
We require domestic publishers to send copies to the largest Hungarian libraries abroad.
√ Partnership with churches.
We recognize and greatly appreciate the activities of Hungarian historical churches abroad that preserve our nation.
We consider cooperation with the leaders of these churches, support and assistance in their work to be an important national political task.
We take decisive action to return illegally confiscated church properties.
√ Operation of a cultural network.
We pay special attention to Hungarian cultural institutions abroad, museums, monuments, memorial sites, cemeteries, castles, churches and their preservation.
We prepare an accurate inventory of Hungarian military graves, military monuments outside the current borders of Hungary,
we conclude mutual war grave maintenance contracts with the countries concerned.
We support the training and work of specialists (archaeologists, restorers, archivists) required for the preservation and renovation of Hungarian monuments and works of art abroad.
√ Keeping scattered Hungarians.
To help the Hungarian population living in sparsely populated areas, we are starting a scattered care program,
which is coordinated by offices set up for each micro-region.
Their task is to develop action programs concerning education, culture, economic opportunities, youth, religious life, and tourism.
Based on the reports compiled by them, we create the scatter strategy for the given region.
We pay special attention to the problems of the declining parts of our nation, the Hungarians in Croatia, Muravidék and őrvidék.
√ Maintaining contact with Hungarians living outside the Carpathian Basin.
We are launching a secondary school program, within the framework of which Hungarian students living outside the Carpathian Basin can spend half a year or a year at a secondary school in Hungary.
We are launching an internship program, with the help of which young Hungarian students or graduates living outside the Carpathian Basin can spend a few months in Hungary in a state or local government job that matches their qualifications.
We maintain the Csoma Sándor Kőrösi Program,
but we are reviewing its budget and tendering and judging practices.
√ Guaranteeing the rights of domestic nationalities.
We provide far-reaching support to domestic nationalities in the exercise of their individual and collective rights,
we help their mother tongue education,
and nurturing their traditions and culture.
We take decisive action against ethno-businesses that cause a lot of damage to the nationalities of Hungary.
In order to prevent abuses, we create a permanent list of names for the conduct of ethnic local government elections,
and the declaration of nationality signed by the representative candidates is classified as a public document.
We will restore the five-person minority municipalities.
In response to the repeated requests of the joint minority committees, we are placing the nationalities programs of the public service media in a more favorable channel.
Holy Crown doctrine and historical constitution
The basis of the historical constitution is the doctrine of the Holy Crown on mutually shared, limited and balanced exercise of power,
which, based on the requirement of the rule of law, expresses the expectation that not the arbitrariness of people, but laws in accordance with constitutional principles rule and govern the country.
The Hungarian constitutional ethos (the Holy Crown idea) and the basic constitutional laws (pivotal laws) together give the complete constitutionality.
He referred to the idealism of the Holy Crown doctrine in the principles of his government for the past four years,
but its real, practical implementation remains up to Jobbik.
We want to deal with this issue not only in the preamble of the Basic Law, which sounds nice but is not binding on anything.
For thousands of years, the historical constitution provided effective protection for the enforcement of individual freedoms, state and national independence, equality of law, the rule of law, and the principle of self-government.
We consider the return to the historical Hungarian constitution to be of fundamental importance,
its renewed retention by the basic law and pivotal laws corresponding to the present requirements.
The Hungarian constitution cannot be separated from the institution of the Holy Crown in any way.
The doctrine of the Holy Crown is a public law concept based on the moral and legal personality of the Holy Crown as an institution.
It expresses the unity of Hungarian statehood,
the constitutional non-alienability of agricultural land and drinking water resources
and Christian statehood.
Relying on Hungarian constitutional traditions and basic values, new frameworks for constitutionalism must be created.
It is necessary to establish the appropriate harmony between the traditional principles and requirements of constitutionalism and the questions of existence raised by the present.
The restoration of the constitution is to be carried out through the consistent, institutional and substantive validation of fundamental socio-economic-political and especially moral-spiritual changes.
The radical constitutional reform to impose all evil,
would serve to incorporate all desirable and organically integrated new,
while embracing everything valuable from the accumulated old constitutional values.
A new basic law must be created on the basic principles of the doctrine of the Holy Crown and fundamental rights,
and it would be necessary to submit this law to a referendum.
An essential issue is the development of appropriate forms of direct popular power exercise,
especially for adopting and changing the Basic Law
and a referendum entitled to dissolve the Parliament,
and the institution of the dissolution of elected bodies (as a collective recall).
For sanctioning constitutional violations manifested in serious or repeated legislative failure, the head of state,
and a specific part of the Parliament must be given the right to decide on the dissolution of the Parliament.
Our goal is to significantly expand the powers of the head of state,
the election of the head of state by the people.
Our goal is to restore the principle of ministerial responsibility
and the unlimited provision of raising the question of no confidence in the current government.
The system of constructive no-confidence must be modified so that the parliament has more room for maneuver,
and the current government should not be guaranteed irreplaceable for four years.
Faithful to our public law traditions, the institution of individual ministerial responsibility must also be created.
It is necessary to regulate public responsibility at the constitutional level from the head of state and government to the lowest civil servant.
It is essential to establish at the level of the Basic Law which assets - the main natural resources and industries - can belong exclusively to the scope of national assets.
It is fundamental to state that land and drinking water resources are part of the national wealth,
which can be obtained with appropriate conditions and restrictions for the protection of national assets.
The basic principles of the constitution and the basic law should be confirmed by a referendum!
3.22 Union Program
3.22.1 United States of Europe instead of United Dreams
Contrary to the formulation of previous governments, the European Union is not equal to Europe.
Hungary does not belong to Europe by joining the Union,
but by virtue of its history,
and in the future we will not be European based on whether we remain members of the EU,
but by staying true to European core values, even vis-à-vis the Union.
Europe was built on three foundations: Greek thought,
to Roman law
and Christian morality.
We rightists believe that not only Europe's past, but also its future can be based on these values.
We consider the integration outlined by the Lisbon Treaty to be a mistake,
as it actually opened up the possibility of creating a supranational superstate.
By the way, with this contract, all provisions of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union became binding.
The Charter provides a greater guarantee than before for the enforcement of human rights, as it has become part of the legal order of the Union and the member states,
however, some of its provisions conflict with our values.
The United Kingdom and Poland requested and received an exemption from the application of the Charter
and later, informally, also the Czech Republic for the sustainability of the Benes decrees declaring the collective guilt of the Hungarian and German ethnic groups.
The Hungarian parliamentary parties did not even attempt to enforce self-determination in this direction.
Contrary to its promises, the EU did not solve the problems of Hungarian national minorities vis-à-vis other nations.
After ten years of membership, we must see that the Union considers the issues of many national minorities important,
but he is completely insensitive to the Hungarian case.
We are committed supporters of cooperation between European states and nations,
but we do not wish to assist in the creation of a superstate without real values.
The public opinion survey data clearly support the growing rejection of the EU in Hungarian society,
and further deepening is rejected by the overwhelming majority of people.
The current Union is no longer the same as the community we joined on May 1, 2004.
since the leaders of the community and the leaders of the most powerful member states now speak openly and clearly about the need to create a political union.
Jobbik represents the concept of Europe of Nations,
which wishes to implement the cooperation of European countries in such a way that national self-determination would be maintained to a greater extent than at present,
significantly narrowing the scope and number of mandatory community legal acts,
returning the powers of national parliaments.
Even within the current framework, the Parliament must be provided with closer powers of control over the activities of the government in the EU.
It is necessary to undertake the confrontation with Brussels on issues such as Hungarian agricultural land,
Hungarian industry
or the treatment of Hungarians as second-class citizens.
Jobbik even undertakes a real confrontation with Brussels for national interests.
If we have to choose between the interest of our country and the interest of the Union, we will not be afraid to decide for our nation.
The second Orbán government stood up against the EU several times in words,
but the actions showed otherwise.
Viktor Orbán repeatedly used the device of doublespeak,
for example, with regard to the budget pact, he spoke for the first time in the Hungarian Parliament that support for the negative British position should be considered,
then more than a month later, in Brussels, he gave his nod to the treaty limiting Hungary's economic independence.
The reaction of Minister of National Economy Mihály Varga to Brussels' proposal for further austerity says everything about the genuineness of the government's much-vaunted fight for economic freedom: what they are asking of us is unfair, unnecessary and unjust - but we are fulfilling it.
The government only took on the conflict with Brussels in connection with consolidating its own power,
he did not do this in matters of national strategy, such as the matter of Hungarian land.
One of the main arguments of supporters of EU membership is the opportunities offered by the subsidies coming from the EU.
In reality, however, most of the EU funds coming to Hungary do not go to domestic companies, but to the multinational companies here,
another part is lost in the bottomless well of political corruption,
while a third part is rather pointless or of little importance, but is used in projects forced by the Union.
We are in a bad position in terms of resource consumption.
The government is mainly late with large tenders, where co-financing should be provided by the state, local governments or some state institution.
The pool of funds, which seems irrevocable due to the failure of the Orbán government, can reach up to HUF 1,000 billion.
Hungary was unable to increase its resources in the 2014-2020 EU budget cycle.
The only reason for the successful expansion of our agricultural support is the payment rate starting from 25%, which limits competitiveness, which was adopted before the accession in 2004.
From 2014, the amount of cohesion funds available for Hungary will decrease by around 20%:
instead of the 25.7 billion euros between 2007 and 2013, 20.4 billion euros of cohesion funds will be available.
Meanwhile, the country pays all the additional costs: it supports British farmers,
was forced to abandon many of its industries,
its agriculture must operate competitively under unequal conditions,
incapable of self-preservation,
and the utilization of the tender funds is insufficient from a social point of view.
3.22.2 What we end
Selling our land.
We will achieve an extension of the land moratorium vis-à-vis Brussels until the protectionist amendment of the accession treaty can take place,
and in Hungary, there will be no guarantee at the constitutional and legal level that Hungarian land assets cannot fall into foreign hands.
ø Corruption and injustices around EU funds.
Rationalization of the system developed in connection with the application and use of EU funds,
the subordination of national interests
and we consider the ruthless eradication of corruption a mandatory task.
Jobbik's goal is to use EU funds for the benefit of the country and through domestic economic actors.
We would like to ensure that, in the case of awarded tenders, the constantly changing legislative environment does not result in the restructuring and recalculation of tenders,
the continuous loss of part of the tender funds.
We consider it essential to strictly monitor EU-funded development programs,
the detection of abuses, in addition to civil and criminal liability.
EU-funded application systems and procedures must be made customer-friendly,
including the simplification and transparency of procedures.
It is necessary to make progress in at least four areas: revising and simplifying the application system,
termination of abuses,
targeting of its subsidies,
prioritizing job-creating and employment-increasing investments over prestige investments would be the most important task.
It would be important to use the opportunities inherent in research and development as effectively as possible,
especially considering the fact that in the next multi-year financial cycle between 2014 and 2020, the resources that can be used for research, development and innovation purposes will increase.
Increasing R&D spending,
strengthening the innovation activity of companies would significantly improve the competitiveness of our country.
For this, a comprehensive structural reform in the area is absolutely necessary.
ø The silence of the European Hungarian question.
Within the EU, the Hungarian question must be made a daily subject of political debates,
with the help of which we must achieve the autonomy aspirations of the Hungarian communities living in the annexed areas,
we must end the legal, political or even physical atrocities against them.
It is necessary to reach the Slovak language law
and the repeal of the Benes decrees that contradict all kinds of fundamental law norms.
3.22.3 And what we solve
√ Preparation of an independent EU balance sheet.
Jobbik continues to claim that Hungary's EU membership is optional.
It is necessary to prepare a comprehensive EU balance sheet that also examines indirect effects, which we have already proposed several times at the parliamentary level.
According to this, for the first time in Hungary it would finally be possible to quantify how much EU membership has brought us,
and how much additional payment we have to count on.
√ Referendum on our EU membership and relationship.
If the Union continues to move in the direction of Brussels-centered empire-building, our country should consider leaving this community for the sake of its own survival, assertion of interests and growth.
and reconsiders its international relations system.
This step can of course be taken as a consequence of a referendum.
Hungary's future - like Norway, Switzerland and Iceland - in the European Economic Area,
we envision it by transforming our relationship system and ending our unilateral Euro-Atlantic dependence.
√ A federal system for a Europe of nations.
Hungary must find allies among the member states of the Union who think similarly to us,
and to set continental cooperation on a completely new course with joint action -
realizing the Europe of Nations, which is based on the diversity, equality and mutual identity of the nations.
√ Central European unity against the empire-building of the Union.
In addition to adopting the policy of opening to the east
we consider it necessary to create a Polish-Hungarian-Croatian axis,
creating the possibility of asserting common interests vis-à-vis the Western European countries dominating the European Union,
also preparing for life outside the European Union.
Given the common EU situation, this cooperation may be supplemented by the participation of Slovakia or Romania.
However, a condition for such close cooperation is that in these two countries, the broad rights necessary for the survival and preservation of the identity of the native Hungarian population are ensured.
3.23 Foreign Affairs Program
3.23.1 Externally driven foreign affairs
After the change of regime, Hungarian foreign policy set itself three goals: improving the situation of Hungarians living in neighboring countries,
the establishment of good neighborly relations
and Euro-Atlantic integration.
The last twenty years have proven that this triple objective or not at all,
or only partially fulfilled,
and that it was for himself, such as EU accession.
Not only did the latter not bring recovery or improvement from the point of view of the country, the Hungarian nation as a whole,
but actually worsened our situation.
The foreign policy leadership that wanted to compulsively meet foreign expectations failed,
missed the historic opportunities offered by the dramatic transformation of the international – and within this European – balance of power,
and entered into deals contrary to the interests of the nation
Hungarian diplomacy has been continuously in a subordinate role since March 1944,
external forces and factors determine its range of motion.
This subordination is also reflected in the weak representation of Hungarians across the border.
Unfortunately, in the priorities of Hungarian foreign policy, meeting the expectations of the current major power centers (1945–89 Moscow; since then Brussels and Washington) has an advantage over representing the interests of Hungarians across the border.
In order to achieve national political goals, the foreign affairs leadership is not even capable of taking on minimal conflicts.
By the mid-1990s, the borders created on the basis of the extremely unjust peace treaties that ended the First and Second World Wars and were extremely unjust for Hungary were changed,
The map of Central and Eastern Europe has been largely redrawn.
Some of the territories that were separated from Hungary with an unjust peace decree fell into the hands of new successor states without Hungarian diplomacy having a say.
Contrary to the past, Jobbik's main objective is to prioritize the interests of Hungarians in all areas of our foreign policy.
Jobbik considers the XX. the reunification of the Hungarian nation that he unjustly tore apart during the 20th century.
Our fundamental moral duty is to represent the interests of the Hungarian communities
and protection of your rights.
The goal of Jobbik's foreign policy is to coordinate the instruments of national politics and diplomacy.
Jobbik consistently fights for the collective rights of Hungarians in the Carpathian Basin,
for the enforcement of territorial, economic and cultural self-determination.
The task of Hungarian diplomacy is to firmly represent its national political goals in bilateral negotiations and international forums.
Hungary has been a determining factor in Central Europe since the founding of the state.
Even if its economic and political weight has decreased since Trianon,
due to its historical and cultural past, and hopefully a better future, it can become a shaper of Central European events.
To this end, Hungary considers it necessary to create a central European Polish-Croatian-Hungarian axis (sea-to-sea axis, intermarium axis),
which could create a common and unified voice towards the Balkans, the Baltics and Eastern Europe,
and would be able to act in a unified manner in the area of ​​advocacy against the Western European countries dominating the European Union.
With the unilateral Euro-Atlanticism, Hungary gave up and lost the commercial, political and cultural positions that still existed during the period of socialism with the developing countries of the world in Asia, Africa, South and Central America, which show serious economic potential in our time.
During the regime change, Hungary chose the worst possible strategy:
while turning its back on its partners built up over many decades, based on trust and generating solvent demand,
until then, it was completely at the mercy of the Western world, which appeared with a suffocating competitive advantage and a need to gain market share.
A particularly painful mistake of the regime change period was that Hungary neglected its relations with Eastern countries due to its exclusive Western orientation.
unlike other European countries, we did not exploit the opportunities of the dynamically expanding Chinese, Russian, Indian, Turkish and Inner Asian markets.
We did not take advantage of the fact that the Turkic peoples of Inner Asia still regard us as relatives without a doubt.
The kinship with them is an integral part of our ancient national consciousness,
and it is convincingly confirmed by the latest research results.
The Fidesz government's chances of a paradigm shift in foreign policy, which adopted the "Eastern opening" policy proposed by Jobbik in 2012 at the level of rhetoric, were severely damaged by its former servile Euro-Atlanticism,
which often took on declared anti-Russia and anti-China overtones.
One of the cornerstones of our foreign affairs program is the opening to the East.
We are planning to build closer foreign affairs relations with the countries of Inner Asia, which consider themselves to be related peoples to Hungary on the basis of culture and origin.
Hungary's position between the western part of Europe and Asia is decisive from a geostrategic point of view,
and this can make the country suitable for the role of an economic, trade bridge, transit country.
The fact that the hitherto unipolar world has now become multipolar must also take effect in our foreign policy.
Along with the West (the USA and Europe), Russia and China have once again become great powers,
Turkey developed into a regional middle power,
and many Latin American and African countries are also on a successful, upward trajectory.
We strive for good relations with all great powers, all poles,
and at the same time we do not forget that our geographical and historical heritage is Europe.
The biggest winners of the global power realignment are the Southeast Asian region and China itself.
As a result of economic restructuring, the Southeast Asian region will become the world's leading economic center within a few years.
Russia's growing influence on our region and world politics is a matter of fact.
From the point of view of trade and energy supply, it is in our elementary interest to establish and maintain a good relationship, if only because of the geographical proximity.
At the center of Jobbik's foreign policy are three countries that have continuously influenced the situation in our region throughout our history, and to which they are strategically important due to their size, proximity, and economic and political weight:
The European continent is dominant, and Germany, which has always exerted a great influence on the Central European region throughout history,
and Russia, located on the edge of Europe, but also exerting a great influence on our region
and Turkey.
The so-called since the regime change, our foreign policy towards the region has been characterized by unconditional friendship with Israel,
Hungarian foreign policy is one-sided and heavily biased in terms of Middle Eastern relations.
Supporting Zionism also meant that we broke the good relations we had developed in the past decades with Iran and the Arab countries,
we gave up our dynamic commercial and economic positions during the period of socialism, and our flourishing scientific, cultural and educational cooperation agreements.
The Fidesz government took timid steps to boost relations with considerable delay,
but this mostly remained at the level of empty words and declarations,
no tangible results were achieved.
Jobbik considers it essential that the new paradigm shift in foreign policy be accompanied by a corresponding structural transformation,
which both in structure and content serve to achieve the goals effectively.
For this, it is not only necessary to strive to transform the organizational structure of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
but also for the full vetting of personnel.
Expertise is an important aspect, but even more important,
that the staff of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs does not endanger the achievement of national and foreign policy goals at any level.
In close connection with this, Jobbik uses the civil and military intelligence and countermeasures services as part of its new foreign policy principles,
subordinates it primarily to Hungarian national interests,
accordingly, it carries out the due diligence of the stock,
develops a new National Security Strategy.
3.23.2 What we end
ø The self-giving national policy.
Jobbik mobilizes the entire toolbox of diplomacy (including cultural diplomacy) in order to make the situation of Hungarians across the border known to the world, the fact of their silent oppression and displacement.
In the neighborhood policy, we prioritize the interests of Hungarians across the border,
rather than complying with the interests of the current allied great powers, which primarily prefer conflict-free Central European relations.
ø One-sided Euro-Atlanticism.
Hungary's foreign policy strategy to geopolitical realities, that is, to the turn taking place in the world
and it must be based on natural associations based on its own past and roots.
For this very reason, Jobbik would revise the era of regime change as the first step in the foreign policy paradigm shift
and the treaties in force defining the unilateral Euro-Atlantic foreign policy.
The economic, commercial and political double-,
and multilateral contracts are renegotiated.
Jobbik ranks it in this circle with the EU,
contracts concluded with the International Monetary Fund,
and Hungarian involvement in various international military missions arising from our NATO membership, which are difficult to interpret from the point of view of our national interests.
ø For foreign policy taboo issues.
Today's Hungarian foreign policy thinking is terribly shallow,
which is only partially due to our often harmful, closed-minded national character,
it stems much more from the servility of foreign affairs management and governments.
The essence of this is that we always exceed the expectations of major powers,
thinking of it as some kind of loyalty and reliability in front of others and ourselves.
As a result, foreign affairs thinking and constructive debate always fall victim to international expectations, and taboos develop.
Today, for example, the colonial policy of the European Union is such a taboo.
United States' unjust wars
or Zionist Israel's world- and country-conquering aspirations.
Jobbik will not tolerate taboos.
Good foreign policy requires diplomatic skills,
but ruthless honesty about our own situation is also necessary.
3.23.3 And what we solve
√ The success of Hungarian self-determination efforts.
In our foreign policy, we strive to find allies for the autonomy aspirations of Hungarians across the border,
to create effective and close collaborations,
for joint actions in international forums.
√ Polish-Hungarian-Croatian cooperation.
The Visegrád Cooperation, which was launched as a regional cooperation, became vacant in the last decade,
with the accession of its members to the EU, the organization lost much of its former momentum.
Currently, none of the member states is able to take a leading role or give new impetus to cooperation:
Hungary's foreign policy weight and reputation is constantly decreasing,
The Czech Republic has a separate passenger policy,
And Poland – as an EU middle power – prefers to assert its interests in the EU.
Jobbik considers it desirable to create a new Polish-Croatian-Hungarian axis,
which, in addition to enabling joint action in the EU negotiations by asserting common interests,
it would also form the basis of a regional cooperation.
The close and friendly relationship between the three countries in the past is an important basis for cooperation.
It is important that within the framework of the EU, which is increasingly inward-looking and operates according to the interests of Western European states
Hungary should find Central European allies with whom our relationship is not burdened by Trianon,
and we can develop a common foreign policy towards the Balkans, the Baltics and the East.
Regional cooperation is justified in several areas: east-west and south-north energy transit (gas, oil, electricity),
infrastructure investments (road, railway), etc.
√ The Eurasian foreign policy paradigm.
Hungary's task is to maintain its independence politically, economically and culturally on the border of Europe and Asia,
in such a way as to form a bridge between the two continents.
For this task, the most necessary task is to find the right balance between the three great powers that are in direct contact with us at the level of their sphere of interest.
In Jobbik's foreign policy concept, the three regional powers, Germany, Russia and Turkey, therefore play a prominent, strategic role.
Among the Western powers, Hungary has special interests in its strategic relations with Germany,
with particular regard to the important economic role played by Germany in Central and Eastern Europe,
to the close relations developed between our countries in the course of our history.
Russia's great power status and geopolitical influence is a clear fact that cannot be ignored.
In view of our geographical situation and the capabilities of Russia, it is a matter of strategic existence to be able to establish good partnership relations with Russia.
For Hungary, Russia represents the secure and reliable energy supply within reach in terms of natural gas and crude oil,
Russia can be one of the most important destination countries for our country's agricultural production and food industry.
Economically and politically, we are establishing closer cooperation with Turkey, which is showing a decisive diplomatic turn and dynamic economic growth,
based on kinship ties and mutual economic interests.
Turkey is also the key to the Central Asian region,
and an important possible mediator to the Middle East as well.
In the case of the Turkic peoples of Inner Asia, the political and economic relationship building is based on cultural relationship building along ancient kinship lines.
√ Good relations with the Far East.
Avoiding vulnerability and the destruction of domestic industry,
we are trying to build on a realpolitik basis with China and the Southeast Asian region, but it is good to build on the basis of common interests,
taking advantage of our role as a European bridgehead.
We consider it particularly important to strengthen the traditionally good relations with Japan and South Korea.
√ The global network of Hungarian foreign trade.
Jobbik is strengthening Hungary's diplomatic and commercial relations with the Arab states of North Africa and the Middle East, with Iran and with the economically emerging countries of the African continent,
because, in addition to Russia and the Balkans, Hungarian food products and agricultural technologies can open up serious opportunities and markets here.
Due to the lack of water in the region, several countries need imports.
Therefore, our existing fresh water supply represents a huge opportunity for us in the region,
Hungarian water management technology is recognized worldwide.
√ External strategic scholarships for Hungarian youth.
We are renewing the exchange student programs,
the scholarship system in higher education,
since Hungarian students' foreign experience and local knowledge are of national strategic value.
If you look at it, every successful country sends its talented young people out into the world,
to acquire the most up-to-date, accurate and broad knowledge for their country.
On the other hand, foreign students studying in our country will contribute to the development of economic, commercial, touristic and cultural relations between the two countries by returning home and hopefully occupying a respected social status at home.
for cooperation based on mutual benefits.
Completion
Jobbik's program consisted of three parts.
In the first part, the Seven Leaders Plan, we summarized the seven main elements of our job creation and economic development concept.
In the second part, the 60-step program, the six areas, including the 10-10 steps, which we intend to implement first when in government.
These six areas are connected by the fact that they have been unresolved for decades,
while they are able to prevent all kinds of positive changes.
If we do not implement the 60 steps program, it will be very difficult, almost impossible, to make the Seven Leaders plan a success.
That is why these issues had to be highlighted and examined more thoroughly.
Finally, the third part of the program is the election program in the traditional sense, which summarizes the situation and tasks of the various sectors.
We already told the truth in 2010.
So now we are asking for an opportunity not only to talk about the problems, not only to talk about our answers to them,
but let's make them happen.
Let's say it.
We will solve it.
It's hard at the same time
and an easy task at the same time.
One thing is certain: we are determined not to deviate from this path for the sake of anyone and anything.
We want to achieve our goals,
in which there are no extraordinary wishes or expectations.
These goals are also your goals.
Just a living
order
and we want accountability in Hungary.
This is what is needed for a better future.
And first of all, a vote from the dear reader, so that in the election race the worst of the worst does not replace each other,
but Jobbik finally wins!
Gábor Vona,
the prime ministerial candidate of Jobbik
If we take Jobbik's 2010 election program in our hands today, we can see that we were right in everything.
We were the only party that, even then, raised the real problems with pin-point precision.
Since then, both system parties - Fidesz and MSZP - have made a lot of noise from our plans,
but they could only spoil them.
What we said then is still valid and a guideline today.
With the 2014 election program, we want to offer an electable, strong and governable alternative to those who are fed up with the governance of both Fidesz and MSZP.
Those who feel that the last 24 years have gone astray.
Those who feel that they have been repeatedly cheated, humiliated and stolen from.
We don't just want to replace the last four years,
but the past twenty-four.
From everything.
We also want to free our country from the Fidesz and MSZP governments.
If you have had enough of any of them, if you want real change, then it is time to finally choose Jobbik, not the lesser evil.
We want to open a new chapter in the life of Hungary and the Hungarian people.
We want to finally start a better future.
Our program is economic recovery,
quality jobs,
order and security,
and firm accountability
and offers real system change.
Let's end the last 24 years!
We ask for your trust in this.
