Doing nothing is not an option.
The economic crisis is taking its toll.
Jobs are being lost, the government is deeply in the red and poverty is increasing.
A next government must show leadership and use the crisis as a hinge towards a better, sustainable future.
Our economy needs to get going again.
And our prosperity must not be at the expense of future generations.
Sitting still or cutting back with the cheese slicer will get us nowhere.
Reforming the left and green is the alternative.
GroenLinks wants to look ahead.
Politicians must now do what is necessary and think about the future of our children.
GroenLinks would like to participate in government in order to achieve two breakthroughs.
First of all, we must now preserve and create jobs.
Especially in these times of crisis, it is up to the government to stimulate investments.
But for jobs with prospects.
GroenLinks is the ally of creative and green entrepreneurs, active employees and conscious citizens who are leading the green revolution.
They benefit from clean and economical production and consumption becoming profitable.
If our country quickly works on green innovation, we will have a strong position in the global market of the future.
Secondly, we must no longer burden new generations with our problems.
That is why significant investments in education are now needed,
reforms to accommodate the ageing population,
effective climate policy
and restructuring of government finances.
The government must become more active and selective.
High earners may be asked to contribute more, so that the strongest shoulders bear the heaviest burdens.
The polluter must pay.
And labor participation must increase.
With these breakthroughs, the Netherlands is taking a new course that many people want.
There are countless Dutch people who are committed to working towards the society of the future.
Sustainable entrepreneurs unite in the new employers' organisation De Groene Zaak.
Union and business leaders are calling for a new Social Agreement that does not condemn people to benefits, but helps them move from job to job.
In neighborhoods, residents jointly produce sustainable energy.
People seek out their neighbors to tackle nuisance together.
Such initiatives are the driving force for change and deserve government support.
The financial crisis marks the bankruptcy of neoliberal market thinking.
Maximum profit motive, absurd bonuses and minimal supervision, things were bound to go wrong.
As a result, the economy is experiencing a severe slump.
Many people are losing their jobs, entrepreneurs are no longer receiving credit and the government is running out of money.
This crisis came from the right, the solutions now come from the left.
Bankers must once again become service providers who put their customers first: savers, entrepreneurs, mortgage holders.
To prevent our savings from being used as gambling capital again, GroenLinks wants to introduce a levy on banks, the amount of which will depend on the risks they take.
Financial products may also only be marketed after approval.
The long term must take precedence.
We desperately need good banks for a sustainable breakthrough.
The credit crisis is symbolic of a society in which people, in the pursuit of ever more consumption, incur ever higher debts.
That too is untenable.
GroenLinks wants to encourage the repayment of debts – rather than the incurrence of them – and limit the deduction of mortgage interest.
This also applies to the business community, where debt now enjoys tax benefits.
This crisis is also a moral crisis.
From bankers who put their bonuses above their customers.
From shareholders and managers who measure the performance of companies solely on short-term profits.
From consumers, entrepreneurs and politicians trapped in hyper-consumption and a credit card culture.
The debate about norms and values ​​is not just about decency on the street.
We need to get rid of the fixation on money as the highest value.
It's time for a different view on prosperity.
Number fetishism clouds our view of the future.
Producing more of everything will yield good growth figures for a short period of time, but will ultimately lead to an exhausted Earth.
Nobel Prize winners and governments are therefore working on a broader definition of prosperity that takes into account well-being, healthy life years and environmental conservation: Gross National Happiness instead of Gross National Product.
Happiness is a better measure of successful politics.
Because numbers have to be right, but it's the people who count.
Both the people living here and now, as well as the people elsewhere and in the future.
If everyone were to live like the average Dutch person, one globe would not be enough.
Preserving natural resources for future generations requires a major revolution.
Every year of delay leads to more pollution, less quality of life, fewer animal and plant species.
We must now reduce greenhouse gas emissions, protect forests and limit fishing.
If the climate really goes out of control and nature is exhausted, then humanity will really be at a disadvantage.
Then food shortages, water shortages and uninhabitable coastal areas force millions of people to flee.
No matter how high we build the dikes, the climate crisis will not pass our country by.
That is why GroenLinks not only wants to tackle the financial and economic crisis, but also the climate crisis and the impending shortage of food, energy and raw materials.
That has to go together.
The Netherlands must become a leader in Europe, and Europe a leader in the world.
The breakthrough to a green economy is inevitable.
Everyone seems convinced, but the opposite happens.
In the past ten years, we have used thirty percent more energy in the Netherlands.
Instead of investing heavily in renewable energy, the government is making room for four new coal-fired power stations.
Research money mainly goes to fossil energy sources.
If wind and solar energy had received the same level of support, the green economy would have been a lot closer.
It is crucial that the polluter pays
and that the demands on products and production processes are being increased.
Then green pioneers will conquer the market faster.
This creates new employment.
In Germany, the switch to renewable energy alone has created hundreds of thousands of jobs.
It is a crying shame that the Netherlands missed the first blow.
GroenLinks wants to give a strong boost to green energy: citizens who install solar panels on their roof will always receive a cost-covering compensation.
If we can muster the money and the drive for green investments now, tackling the climate crisis can also be the way out of the economic crisis.
The government must be a strict market master.
Not only to green the economy, but also to protect consumers and taxpayers.
Markets can fail.
Sometimes the profit motive of companies poses too great a risk to the well-being of citizens.
We should therefore not surrender public tasks such as healthcare and education to the market, but rather cherish and improve them.
A government that can no longer be held accountable for its core tasks causes alienation and irritation.
GroenLinks opts for a government that steps out from behind its desk.
It should not be the procedures, permits or indications that are leading, but the people.
The government must not only become more active, but also more selective.
Public administration in the Netherlands is in need of a major overhaul.
Responsibilities must be more clearly defined.
We can do with fewer ministries,
fewer provinces
and fewer drivers.
The government should not promise more than it can deliver.
Citizen cooperation is indispensable in solving social problems.
Personal initiative deserves support.
Whether it concerns residents who are renovating the street, people who are building their own house, neighbours who want to generate green energy together, parents who are making a plan for a comprehensive school, the elderly who are organising their own care or social partners who are concluding a collective labour agreement for lifelong learning.
Good education is part of a civilized country.
It is our ticket to the future.
But much talent is nipped in the bud.
Late bloomers do not receive the education that suits them.
Others do not receive the personal attention they need.
As many as a quarter of our young people leave school with too few or no diplomas at all.
They risk being sidelined for a long time.
A more social Netherlands starts with better education.
Every child should be able to develop his or her talents.
Whether you are born with a pair of golden hands, a talent for mathematics or an autistic disorder.
This requires individual attention, trust and classes in which every child can thrive.
With GroenLinks in government, there will be no cuts in education.
On the contrary.
This is where the greatest investment is needed, especially in primary and vocational education.
More teachers.
Better teachers.
Less segregation.
GroenLinks wants all schools in the Netherlands to become comprehensive schools, with a programme from seven to seven.
Every primary school should have a preschool, where toddlers can develop through play.
This is how we combat backlogs.
This way, every child receives the guidance they need.
An ageing country cannot afford to write off its young people.
Our welfare state must move with the times.
The labor market has changed.
Fewer and fewer employees have the security of a permanent job for life.
A modern labor market requires more security for flexible workers and better social protection for the self-employed
and significant investments in retraining and further training.
GroenLinks wants every employee to receive an individual training budget.
Lifelong learners can take on new jobs.
Job security is the starting point of the modern participation state.
That work doesn't always have to be full-time.
Work can be too much if you also have to care for small children or sick parents.
Life becomes a drag when you keep not getting around to volunteering or studying.
The company of the future offers the space to choose less income and more happiness.
The country is aging and we will soon have a shortage of people.
That is why we ask everyone to contribute.
Most of us will have to work longer.
But it would not be fair if we all only receive our AOW pension at the age of 67, as the previous cabinet proposed.
GroenLinks has a fairer proposal.
People who started working early, often in a demanding profession, can receive state pension before the age of 65.
Those who study for a long time and start later, work longer.
GroenLinks stands up for people in vulnerable situations.
Poverty must be tackled, especially in families with children.
Those who work hard for low wages deserve to pay less taxes.
In exchange for protection against poverty, the government may ask everyone to contribute according to their ability.
Helping more people into work is the challenge facing all of Europe.
The strength of our euro depends on the pace at which all countries reform their welfare states.
That is the lesson of the Greek budget crisis.
A monetary union must have the political authority to intervene when national politicians fail.
GroenLinks works towards emancipation through better education and equal opportunities in the labour market.
In a liberal society you can shape your own life, unhindered by prejudices or peer pressure.
Muslim women should not be forced to wear a headscarf, nor should they be required to remove it.
Gay couples, just like heterosexuals, should be able to walk down the street hand in hand without fear of violence.
The increased diversity in the Netherlands does not always make living together easy.
That is precisely why we require newcomers to learn our language.
This way we can discuss the issues that divide us without beating each other's brains in.
The rule of law is our common starting point.
This makes an open society possible.
Liberal coexistence is not possible without respect for human rights and minorities.
We must therefore be careful in identifying and addressing the issues surrounding migration.
No one has to give up their passport or their faith, everyone must participate.
Too many migrants are socio-economically disadvantaged.
That needs to be broken in.
GreenLeft invests in education
and transforms our meager welfare state into an activating participation state.
Too many boys from migrant families turn to crime.
GroenLinks wants problem families to receive strong guidance and for punishment not only to be retribution, but also the start of an education or job.
Discrimination is and will remain unacceptable.
It is disastrous to repeatedly address people from minorities who go their own way about their origins.
Emancipation of newcomers is key to their integration into society.
GroenLinks wants to involve those who are left behind
and help the forerunners move forward.
The Polish migrant who opens a delicatessen.
The student from Africa who can be openly gay in the Netherlands.
The young Muslim women who, with or without headscarves, storm the lecture halls.
They are bridge builders between the majority and minorities, between the Netherlands and the world.
The future must not happen to us.
We have to shape that ourselves.
A time of crisis offers opportunities for this.
Ingrained patterns lose their self-evidence, old coalitions fall apart.
New ideas gain credibility.
GroenLinks has an agenda for the future.
Connecting green and social policies.
Drawing strength from differences.
Providing equal opportunities to everyone.
Now.
Soon.
Here.
Over there.
Our country is teeming with practical idealists.
They do not wait for politicians to tackle the climate crisis or the credit crisis, but take action themselves.
They come up with green innovations or import fair trade products from Africa.
They tweet their support for Iranian democrats and help Chinese internet users circumvent censorship.
They are switching to a sustainable bank.
These global citizens deserve a government that encourages them, not holds them back.
The Hague must exchange its blinkers for a broad view outwards.
The Netherlands benefits from a strong international approach to failing markets, human rights violations and the overexploitation of the earth.
We are a global country.
Our economy runs on energy and raw materials from elsewhere.
We earn half of our wealth from exports.
Our currency is European.
We are vulnerable to sea level rise.
Our future depends on good neighbors and distant friends.
Trade, travel and the Internet are making the world smaller and smaller.
Globalization offers great opportunities, but not yet for everyone.
Today's wild globalization brings more burdens than benefits to many developing countries.
Climate change is washing away their livelihoods.
The financial crisis has dried up the flow of credit.
Only if we manage globalization properly will everyone benefit.
This requires fair trade: poor countries must be able to earn more from their exports.
Open markets also include migrant workers.
They bring labor and brainpower to rich countries.
When they return, they take capital and knowledge back to their home country.
Fair globalization remains an illusion as long as we take with one hand what we give with the other.
Rich countries allow multinationals to siphon off their profits from developing countries without paying taxes on them.
In this way, poor countries lose more income than they receive through development aid.
This tax theft must stop, starting in the Netherlands.
If governments in developing countries collect more taxes, we can focus our aid more on groups that do not automatically get opportunities: small farmers looking for markets for their food, women and minorities who want to become emancipated.
Agriculture, human rights and good governance are topics that our country has a lot of knowledge about.
We must incorporate these strengths into a joint European development policy.
The Netherlands cannot do everything, but what we do can be more effective and less fragmented.
Fair globalization is the fair sharing of scarce resources, with poor countries and with future generations.
Rich countries must use energy, raw materials, agricultural land and vulnerable ecosystems more sparingly.
Maximum economic growth should no longer be our highest goal.
Especially since the quality of our lives is also determined by other factors, such as health, education, friendships and family ties, meaningful work and a green living environment.
Rich countries like the Netherlands would do well to make Gross National Happiness a yardstick for their development.
By moderating our consumerism, we create space for growth in prosperity in developing countries.
Only when life is no longer a struggle for survival can we expect people to start thinking about the future of our planet.
That they see a tree as a climate savior, instead of firewood.
Reducing poverty is an indispensable part of sustainable development.
Taming casino capitalism and eliminating injustice and violence is something our country cannot do alone.
Together with our neighbors we are stronger.
The Netherlands benefits from a strong European policy on the world stage.
Our raised finger should not point helplessly in the air, but should nudge Europe into action.
The Copenhagen climate summit at the end of 2009 proved that there is still much to be desired in terms of European decisiveness.
At the decisive moment our representatives were offside.
They had been given too little negotiating room by the 27 Member States.
That has to improve in Mexico, by the end of this year.
That summit will determine whether we can control climate change.
Europe must become a pioneer again,
but also forging alliances.
Working with China on clean technology.
Providing climate support to poor countries so that they can make the leap from charcoal fires to green energy in one go.
Europe has no shortage of diplomats, soldiers and development workers.
But their efforts are fragmented.
National flag display should make way for European consolidation of forces.
Then European citizens will get more value for their money.
And a greater voice in world politics.
We cannot leave that to the United States and China.
Europe must have a say in the future of our world.
The new government will have a Minister of International Cooperation, who will be responsible for Foreign Affairs, Development Cooperation, Trade and Defence.
This minister sets an agenda for fair globalization and ensures coherent implementation in all policy areas.
The Netherlands is committed to European and international trade rules that offer more opportunities for sustainable development in poor countries.
These countries will receive greater market access and support for exporting processed products that they can profit from more than raw materials.
Our country strongly supports the right of developing countries to protect emerging sectors, public services and agriculture against competition from rich countries.
The Netherlands is committed to regulating international land purchases and concessions to prevent local communities and small farmers from being evicted from their land.
The Netherlands must no longer be a tax haven for multinationals.
An end will be put to legislation, such as the group interest box, which encourages financing structures that allow companies to siphon off their profits from developing countries virtually tax-free.
The government is committed to European coordination of corporate profit taxation in order to combat tax competition.
The Netherlands advocates a multilateral system of information exchange between tax authorities, reporting by multinationals on profits made and taxes paid per country, and support for developing countries in improving their tax collection.
The Netherlands is committed to relaxing patents on medicines and environmental technology for the benefit of developing countries.
The Netherlands plays a driving role in the field of climate.
Within the EU and at the international negotiating table, the Netherlands fights for fair and effective climate agreements that are in line with the conclusions of climate science.
Within the EU, the Netherlands is advocating the establishment of an international platform for green technology, in which China and India, among others, participate.
The Netherlands is putting pressure on rich countries to adhere to the agreement to spend at least 0.7 percent of their gross national income (GNI) on development cooperation.
The Netherlands also advocates that rich countries commit themselves to contributing to the development of poor countries through trade, labour migration, study migration, tax policy, agricultural policy and conflict prevention.
Our country sets a good example, for example by spending at least 0.8 percent of GNI on development cooperation, including through social organizations.
Structural climate support to developing countries is in addition to this.
The Netherlands is committed to better coordination of development aid, with each recipient country being accountable to just one leading donor.
Within the EU, the Netherlands, with a leading group of willing member states, is campaigning for a pooling of national and European expertise and resources in the field of development cooperation.
This European Development Cooperation Service works closely with the European Diplomatic Service.
Dutch development cooperation focuses on sustainable agriculture, human rights and good governance.
These key points include:
a) food security, biodiversity conservation, water management and climate change adaptation.
The Netherlands promotes investments in a sustainable increase in agricultural productivity, especially of small farmers;
b) sexual and reproductive health.
The government is committed to the right of women and men to make their own decisions about sexuality, choice of partner and having children.
She underlines the importance of this for the achievement of the United Nations Millennium Goals;
c) combating violence against women and girls and promoting their access to (vocational) education, employment and capital;
d) the emancipation of minorities such as homosexuals, transgender people, ethnic minorities and people with disabilities;
e) combating corruption.
Debt forgiveness resulting from export credit insurance will no longer be charged to the development budget.
The Dutch export credit fund must support itself from collected premiums.
There will be a binding code for socially responsible banking, initially for banks that rely on government support, and a professional oath for bankers.
The Netherlands is committed to strong European and global supervision of the financial markets.
The financial derivatives market is becoming more transparent.
New financial products are tested in advance for comprehensibility and risks by supervisors.
They curb speculation.
Major banks will pay a surcharge on corporate tax, the amount of which will depend on the risks they take.
Within the EU and the International Monetary Fund, the Netherlands advocates a levy on financial transactions that would counter speculative trading and stabilise markets.
The Netherlands advocates a separation between consumer banks and commercial banks.
Measures are being taken against vulture funds that buy up the debts of developing countries.
They should not be allowed to parasitize on debt relief or seize development funds.
24. Human rights are leading in international cooperation.
The Netherlands advocates participation instead of exclusion, dialogue instead of boycott, wherever possible.
Both bilaterally and within the EU and the UN, the Netherlands is committed to compliance with human rights and international law, with a view to eradicating the horrors of war.
Appropriate action will be taken against countries that repeatedly refuse to comply with human rights.
25.The Netherlands is committed to the humanisation of international law: the safety of people takes precedence over the sovereignty of states.
Our country is committed to ensuring that the international community is better equipped to prevent, stop and punish genocide, war crimes and serious human rights violations.
26 The Netherlands is committed to a just solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in accordance with international law.
The government is talking to all parties, including Hamas.
She denounces human rights violations by both Israeli and Palestinian sides.
Within the EU, it is seeking support to suspend the Association Agreement with Israel if Israel continues to violate international law and human rights.
27.The Netherlands will not abandon Afghanistan.
The construction of a democratic, safe constitutional state is a priority.
This requires greater efforts to combat corruption, strengthen governance, the judiciary, civil organisations and the position of women, as well as negotiations with moderate Taliban.
The Netherlands is contributing more police trainers to the EU training mission.
Our country does not support offensive military operations.
28.Expansion of the European peace zone is in the Dutch interest.
Our country holds the EU to its accession promises and to its accession conditions.
The countries of the Western Balkans and Turkey may become members if they meet the conditions of democracy, human rights and non-discrimination.
Iceland, Norway and Switzerland may also join if they wish, under the same conditions.
29. EU Member States that violate human rights will be firmly held accountable.
30. The Government provides support to organisations working on crisis prevention, peacebuilding and the protection of human rights activists and journalists.
Within the EU, she advocates strengthening the programme for the deployment of trained civilians in support of peace and reconciliation processes.
Diplomats also specialize in negotiations, local languages ​​and culture.
31. The Dutch army focuses on conflict management, peacekeeping, peace enforcement and support for crisis management, provided that these missions are supported by the UN and offer the prospect of reconciliation and reconstruction.
The Netherlands is committed to cooperation and specialisation of the armies of the EU countries, in order to increase their efficiency, effectiveness and deployability.
32. The Netherlands aims to see NATO abolished in the long term, with NATO's functions being partly taken over by the UN and partly by regional military partnerships such as the EU.
33. The Netherlands withdraws from the project for the development of the Joint Strike Fighter.
34. The Netherlands is launching a political and diplomatic offensive to abolish all nuclear weapons.
The nuclear weapons on our territory will be removed.
The Netherlands is campaigning for an end to NATO's nuclear weapons task and accession to the Non-Proliferation Treaty by (suspected) nuclear weapon states that are not members.
35. Our country is complying better with the EU arms export code and is committed to an international treaty against arms trade.
Arms trade and transit in the Netherlands are strictly restricted.
36. The Netherlands is committed to reforming the United Nations,
which makes the Security Council more decisive and representative
and strengthens the position of the Secretary-General.
37. The Netherlands advocates the establishment of a strong UN organisation for Sustainable Development, which would provide a counterweight to the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
The Netherlands also advocates reform of the WTO so that sustainability and fair trade are given greater weight.
38. The Netherlands promotes that the EU and the eurozone speak with one voice in the world.
Our country is striving for a common European seat on the UN Security Council, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
39. The Netherlands is committed to a fairer distribution of votes within the World Bank and the IMF, whereby developing countries will have a much stronger say in decision-making.
40. The embassies and consulates of the EU countries will be merged as much as possible within the new European diplomatic service.
The validity of passports will be extended to 10 years.
Sustainable entrepreneurship is no longer a fad.
In Europe, no energy source attracts as much investment as wind turbines.
In the Netherlands, green companies have united in De Groene Zaak to make a progressive voice heard from employers.
More and more farmers are going organic.
Every businessman who thinks beyond his own annual bonus knows: green entrepreneurship is the future.
Dutch citizens also want to move forward.
They are switching en masse to green energy.
They install solar panels on their roof.
They take action against pig flats.
The Brabant citizen initiative 'Mega-Stables No' collected tens of thousands of signatures.
The realization is there: a country that works on sustainability and green, works on its happiness.
And what does the government do? This allows the construction of four new coal-fired power stations and invests little in green energy.
She allows the livestock industry to expand and sends letters to Brussels to complain about the troublesome European nature policy.
Politics is failing forward-thinking entrepreneurs and consumers.
GroenLinks sides with the innovators.
They benefit from clear environmental rules, because they help innovative companies conquer the market.
This is how we steer the economy in a green direction.
This is how we create jobs with a future.
With clean technology, excellent education, top research and strong green companies, the Netherlands can take a lead in the global economy.
We have an opportunity to invent the energy and mobility of the future.
The materials that are sustainable and recyclable.
Healthy food without the aftertaste of animal suffering or pollution.
The water technology that protects developing countries from crop failures and flooding.
Financial services that attract venture capital for investment, rather than flash capital for speculation.
Science, art and creative industries are the ideas engine of this innovative economy.
Green is the most promising export commodity in a world that is becoming more sustainable one way or another.
Green politics is also profitable in the short term.
Saving energy reduces electricity and gas bills, makes us less dependent on oil imports and creates new jobs.
Insulating old houses alone can provide years of work for tens of thousands of construction workers.
The residents get more living comfort for less money.
Greening our energy and tax policy also makes renewable energy profitable.
If investments are recouped more quickly, the Netherlands can move out of the European backwater.
Our companies can become leaders in offshore wind farms, geothermal energy and truly sustainable biofuels.
Citizens can break the power of dirty energy producers by generating their own electricity from the sun and wind.
Germany shows what the consistent promotion of large and small initiatives can yield.
That country expects to produce more green than gray energy by around 2020.
Our climate policy is intertwined with that of our neighbours.
20 percent renewable energy in 2020 is a hard European agreement.
GroenLinks also wants to literally connect the countries of Europe with each other.
A European network of efficient high-voltage cables should make our electricity supply robust.
This supergrid absorbs fluctuations in the supply of green energy.
When there is no wind in the North Sea, we get solar power from Spain, or even from the Sahara.
The sun alone provides a thousand times more energy than humanity needs.
With green technology we can leave the fossil era behind us.
But technology does not solve all environmental problems.
We also need to look critically at our behavior.
To excessive meat consumption, for example.
Our livestock industry degrades animals into machines,
pollutes nature
and increases the risk of animal diseases such as Q fever being transmitted to humans.
We drag animal feed from all over the world.
Tropical forests are being cut down to grow soy for our pigs.
This can and must be done differently.
We don't all have to become vegetarian, but one meatless day a week makes a difference.
Conscious consumers deserve better agriculture.
European agricultural policy still subsidises environmental damage and animal suffering.
Overproduction fobs farmers off with low prices.
GroenLinks wants the Netherlands to become a pioneer in a new agricultural policy.
A policy that puts quality over quantity and gives more market power to farmers.
They should be able to join forces to negotiate a better price with supermarket chains and the food industry.
Farmers also deserve a good reward for their services to society, such as nature management.
In this way, farmers become partners in a landscape renovation that creates more space for water and recreation.
In this way, our farmers will help build a more beautiful Netherlands.
The new government will have a Minister of Sustainability and Spatial Planning, who will be responsible for the Environment, Nature, Energy, Agriculture, Fisheries, Housing and Spatial Planning.
This minister draws up an agenda for efficient (re)use of natural resources.
The government supports corporate social responsibility in every possible way.
She is going to purchase sustainably and tender green.
It quickly grants permits to green initiatives from citizens and companies.
The government is establishing a Green Investment Bank, which will provide favourable loans for green investments and sustainable housing construction.
Small and new companies will have more opportunities to obtain government contracts, so that they can bring (green) innovations to the market more quickly.
The Netherlands is committed to strict European regulations for products and production processes, which encourage the economical use of energy, water and raw materials.
Companies are encouraged to exchange heat, water and residual products for reuse.
The Netherlands aims to achieve 3 percent energy savings per year.
Credit guarantees are used to exploit the savings potential in the industry.
Owners of older houses will receive compensation to help them recoup the costs of home insulation more quickly.
Energy companies and housing associations also invest in home insulation.
Tenants and homeowners with low incomes will be given priority, so that they can be the first to benefit from lower energy bills.
Compliance with the energy label obligation will be monitored when selling or renting buildings.
The Building Decree should not stand in the way of the green ambitions of municipalities; Municipalities may impose more far-reaching sustainability requirements than those prescribed in the Building Decree.
10. Within 5 years, all new construction will be at least energy neutral, starting with all new government buildings.
11. A deposit system will be introduced for cans and small PET bottles.
12. All subsidies that do not fit into a sustainable economy will be phased out.
Remaining subsidies will be replaced, where possible, by government guarantees and loans.
13. The tax system will be made greener, also at provincial and municipal level.
Existing environmental taxes on packaging, energy, waste and fuels will be increased.
The proceeds from these taxes are partly used to reduce taxes on labour and wage costs for employers, particularly for low-paid labour.
14. In 2020, Dutch greenhouse gas emissions will be at least 30 percent lower than in 1990.
Within the EU, the government is advocating a reduction target of at least 40 percent in 2020 and at least 90 percent in 2050,
as well as for a fair burden-sharing.
15. The Netherlands is fighting for improvements to the European emissions trading system: auctioning all emission rights instead of giving them away for free
and a minimum price per ton of greenhouse gas that stimulates innovation.
16. There will be an environmental tax on greenhouse gas emissions in sectors that are not covered by the European emissions trading system.
This tax encourages entrepreneurs to invest in green innovation.
17. Large consumers, like consumers, will pay an energy tax.
18. A strict CO2 standard will be introduced for new power plants, which will prevent the construction of coal-fired power plants.
Existing coal-fired power stations will pay a coal tax as long as European emission rights remain too cheap.
19. The Netherlands is opting for natural gas, the least polluting fossil fuel, as long as the transition to a sustainable energy supply has not yet been completed.
The government is advocating a common energy policy within the EU to secure the European gas supply.
20. CO2 storage is paid for by electricity producers themselves.
Experiments do not take place under populated areas.
The consequences for vulnerable natural areas are taken into account.
21. The nuclear power plant in Borssele is closed.
There will be no new nuclear power plants for energy generation.
22. A Delta Act on new energy is coming.
This ensures sufficient administrative power and resources to achieve the target of 20 percent renewable energy in 2020.
There will be a specific target of 35 percent in 2020 for both green electricity and sustainable energy for heating.
23. Self-generation of energy by citizens, companies, local and regional authorities is strongly encouraged.
The Netherlands is introducing the German feed-in system, so that citizens and companies that produce green energy always receive a guaranteed price for it.
Bureaucratic obstacles disappear.
24. Energy companies are required to produce an increasing share of sustainable energy year on year.
25. The government selects and arranges sufficient locations for wind turbines on land and issues concessions to operators.
The income is reinvested in green energy.
26. An emergency law for offshore wind energy will be introduced, aimed at 10,000 megawatts of North Sea power in 2020.
Planned investments for the next 10 years are brought forward.
27. A 'power socket at sea' will soon be built that will transport and distribute wind power from the North Sea.
Within the EU, the Netherlands is campaigning for an underground and submarine supergrid of high-voltage direct current cables that will connect the most important supply and demand locations for green energy.
28. The Netherlands is committed to binding European sustainability requirements for all forms of bioenergy.
With biofuels, the effects on land use are taken into account so that their cultivation does not come at the expense of nature, food supply and indigenous peoples.
29. Farmers will have more opportunities to earn part of their income from the development of (agricultural) nature, recreation, services and care.
30. The government promotes sustainable innovations in rural areas, such as organic farming, energy-producing greenhouses and regional marketing cooperatives.
31. The government promotes the restoration of the bond between town and country and between farmer and citizen, including through farmer cooperatives around urban areas and through education on health and food.
32. The Netherlands will reduce pollution of soil, water and air caused by large-scale agriculture; the livestock population is being reduced.
33.The use of (preventive) antibiotics in livestock farming will be significantly reduced to prevent the emergence of resistant bacterial strains.
34. The high VAT rate will apply to meat.
35. The Netherlands advocates within the European context that plant products from organic farming should be exempt from VAT.
36. The Netherlands is advocating a major revision of EU agricultural policy, in which:
a) global and regional food security,
protection of natural resources,
fair trade with developing countries
and a fair income for farmers is paramount;
b) export subsidies are immediately abolished and structural surpluses are eliminated;
c) organic and animal-friendly farming is strongly promoted;
d) subsidies are transformed into payments for the green and blue services that farmers and other land managers provide to society;
e) EU competition policy is adjusted in such a way that farmers have more market power in relation to food processors and supermarkets.
37. The precautionary principle applies to genetic modification, in order to protect the environment and health.
Genetic modification is not used in Dutch agriculture as long as safety for humans and nature is not guaranteed.
Growers of genetically modified crops and suppliers will be fully liable for (environmental) damage.
38. The Netherlands advocates better labelling of genetically modified products within the EU.
39. The Netherlands opposes the granting of patents on genes and living organisms.
40. Government support for agricultural research focuses in particular on a more sustainable use of water, nutrients, energy and land,
as well as increasing disease resistance in crops and animals.
41. In order to create the environmental conditions for healthy nature and increase biodiversity, eutrophication, desiccation, nitrogen emissions and poor water quality are tackled in accordance with EU guidelines.
The Netherlands is committed to optimal recovery of biodiversity within the European context, by preserving EU nature directives, such as the bird and habitat directives, and by protecting Natura 2000 areas.
42. The Ecological Main Structure (EMS) will be completed in 2018.
The protection of the Natura 2000 areas will also be achieved without further delay.
More money is being allocated for this.
In order to accelerate the acquisition of land for the EHS, a suitable bid will be submitted in a timely manner and, if necessary, expropriation procedures will be initiated to acquire the last land.
Natural values ​​outside the EHS also receive sufficient protection.
43. In the larger nature reserves, natural processes are pursued as much as possible, for example by reducing hunting and stopping supplementary feeding.
44. Agri-environmental management will be included within the EHS if it yields real benefits for nature.
If this saves money, it will be spent on nature goals.
45. There will be core meadow bird areas, where caring for breeding meadow birds is more important to farms than livestock farming.
46. ​​Wild animals are in principle left alone.
If animals cause significant damage or pose a threat to public health or safety, the killing of some of these animals will only be permitted in cases of extreme necessity and if there are no alternatives.
This management hunt is strictly controlled.
More investment is being made in animal-friendly methods of pest control, such as for muskrats.
47. The government is working with social organisations to improve the landscape, aimed at restoring characteristic cultural landscapes by creating hedgerows, wooded banks and field margins.
48. In nature reserves such as the North Sea, the Wadden Sea, the South Holland and Zeeland Delta and De Peel, there is no place for harmful economic activities such as gas drilling and land reclamation.
49. The Netherlands contributes to sufficient marine reserves in the North Sea, so that fish stocks can recover.
50. The Netherlands advocates the gradual introduction of the ‘no unless’ principle in European fisheries policy: commercial fishing will only be permitted if the ecosystem is healthy and only natural fish growth will be caught.
51. By-catch is prevented as much as possible through improved fishing methods.
The remaining by-catch is brought ashore and processed.
52. Animals have their own intrinsic value.
Therefore, they have the right to be treated with respect and their interests must be carefully taken into account.
Animal rights are included in the Constitution and in a binding European charter.
53. The livestock industry is being phased out gradually.
Farm animals go outside again to forage, graze and root.
54. There will be a ban on keeping mink and other fur-bearing animals for their fur.
The Netherlands is striving for a complete ban on trade in and import of fur products within the European context.
55. Farm animals are vaccinated against diseases such as bird flu and foot and mouth disease, so that large-scale killing can be avoided.
56. Livestock transport will be restricted.
Cattle for slaughter may not be transported for more than 4 hours.
57. There will be a ban on animal-unfriendly interventions, such as the castration of piglets.
58. The Netherlands is committed to a European (import) ban on very animal-unfriendly products such as foie gras.
59. The killing of wintering geese is only permitted if all alternatives have been exhausted.
60. Methods are prescribed for commercial fishermen and fish farmers that cause little or no suffering to the fish.
61. Animal testing will be phased out.
As a first step, such trials will only be allowed if this is the only way to achieve substantial improvements in public health.
Transparency surrounding the methods and results of animal testing is increased.
More money will be made available for alternative testing methods.
62. Welfare and health regulations will be introduced for the pet trade.
The Netherlands is also striving for a ban on the import of exotic animals, also within the European context.
63. Breeding of domestic animals for characteristics that threaten the welfare of an animal breed is prohibited.
There will be a limited list of all animal species that may be kept as pets.
64. There will be certification for animal shelters and reception centers.
Animal welfare is an important criterion in this regard.
65. Entertainment and sports involving animals which can be shown to seriously harm animal welfare shall be prohibited.
A legal ban on the use of wild animals in circuses is coming.
66. A Public Access to Production and Chains Act will be introduced.
This gives consumers the right to information about compliance with international standards in the areas of human rights, the environment and labour by companies and their suppliers, including outside the Netherlands, as well as about the environmental impact of products and services.
67. Dutch multinationals are held liable for violations of internationally recognised standards by their foreign subsidiaries and suppliers.
The Netherlands is committed to new, binding international standards for the protection of biodiversity and animal welfare.
68. Large companies will be required to prepare annual reports on their performance in the areas of human rights, labour standards and the environment.
69. Governments require any company wishing to qualify for government support or tenders to demonstrate compliance with internationally recognised standards.
70. When purchasing and tendering, governments set a good example by opting for products with quality marks such as Fairtrade, Forest Stewardship Council, Marine Stewardship Council and EKO or with reliable certification systems.
71. The government sets requirements for banks with which it does business.
These must be among the best performing in the banking sector in terms of sustainability.
72. The government provides more information about the harmful environmental effects of eating meat.
A housing association that hires unemployed construction workers as handymen, a supermarket where people with intellectual disabilities stock shelves and pack groceries, and a single mother on welfare who starts working as a self-employed tax advisor.
There are all kinds of new forms of service provision that can be devised, but that work must also pay off.
To do this we need to reduce taxes on labor
and offer more security to starting self-employed people.
Then the service economy can become a job engine.
The crisis has caused many people to lose their jobs and livelihoods.
Or they cannot find work: youth unemployment is rising.
Retaining jobs and creating new ones must therefore be top priorities.
GroenLinks wants an economy in which everyone can participate.
No labor market that sows division between people with permanent jobs and people with temporary jobs, between highly educated and low-educated people.
Such a labor market requires a new Social Agreement.
Together with trade unions and employers, GroenLinks wants to move from a meager welfare state to an activating participation state.
Where every person can develop and build an independent, secure and relaxed existence.
This is also in the interest of society as a whole.
When more and more people start retiring for their well-earned retirement, we will need everyone.
There are people who are eager for more flexibility in their work.
Take the train driver who wants to combine caring for his children with the obligations of his timetable.
Or the secretary who wants to work less for her boss so she can spend more time on her own online store.
GroenLinks wants employees to have more say in where and when they work and how they organise their work.
With careers that move with the life cycle, people don't have to peak in their careers when the children are small.
In a modern labor market, the relationship between employer and employee is based on trust and results rather than mistrust and presence.
There are also people who have uncertain positions in the labor market.
They are the ones who are bearing the brunt of the economic crisis: temporary workers, freelancers, flexible workers and self-employed people without staff.
They deserve more security and better social protection.
Some people don't get a job at all.
Too many less educated people, young people, people with disabilities, less healthy people and the elderly are being kept out of the labour market and made dependent on minimal benefits.
Three out of five women are still not economically independent.
They too must be able to work.
It should therefore become easier for companies to offer jobs to people with fewer opportunities.
By reducing employer contributions, more people can be hired.
In a fair and modern labour market, everyone should be able to learn throughout their lives.
GroenLinks is enthusiastic about new development contracts and development collective labour agreements: agreements on training between employer and employee.
This gives people the opportunity to follow training alongside work and acquire skills that extend beyond their current job.
People who have been dependent on low-paid work their entire lives also deserve prospects, through agreements on appreciation and quality of work.
To ensure that every worker is treated equally, GroenLinks wants to convert the current severance payments for some into training rights for all.
Companies should not put people on the street, but guide them from job to job.
Firing people who have no prospects of other work should be discouraged.
Employers who frequently dismiss employees must therefore pay extra for unemployment benefits.
Everyone has the right to job security.
GroenLinks gives people who have been unemployed for more than a year the right to a participation contract with the municipality.
The compensation for this is the statutory minimum wage.
The content of the contract can vary greatly.
People for whom work is quickly on the horizon will be subject to a strict application obligation.
Personal reintegration budgets enable people to find new work themselves.
Those who can advance through education or provide informal care will be given the opportunity to do so.
For those who find paid work unfeasible, sheltered employment or volunteer work can be a good alternative.
A subsidized job is also an option, whether or not as a stepping stone to a regular job.
In all cases, the starting point is that for money from the community there is an obligation to participate.
Naturally, to the best of our ability.
There can be no modern labor market without good social security and sufficient income.
But in almost a third of single-parent families, young children grow up in poverty.
Migrants and single people also often live on a very low income.
In the last few years, poverty in the Netherlands has even increased again.
That is why GroenLinks opts for reforms.
Parents with a low income receive more child benefit.
People who work hard and earn little will pay less tax.
If people are unlucky and become completely incapacitated for work, a good benefit is a given.
But people who are fully or partially approved will be offered a suitable job.
The question is what you can still do, not what you cannot do.
GroenLinks strengthens solidarity between generations by modernizing old-age provisions.
Older people who have a good income will also pay AOW premiums in the long term.
The age at which you retire depends on the number of years you have worked.
By linking the AOW to employment history, the pension system becomes fairer.
People who started working early, often in a demanding profession, can retire before the age of 65.
People who study for a long time and enter the labor market later continue to work until after the age of 65.
This means that the AOW will remain affordable in the future.
The government is pushing for a Social Agreement for a new labor market.
The costs of unemployment are increasingly being shifted to the employer through premium differentiation.
Firm agreements are made about sufficient training budgets and internship places,
hiring people who carry more risks
and preventing unemployment by guiding people from job to job.
Preserving and creating jobs is a top priority.
Taxes on labour and wage costs, particularly for low-paid labour, will be reduced for employers.
Working for a low wage should yield more financial returns.
This ensures that economic independence becomes possible sooner with a part-time job and low wages.
The age at which someone is entitled to the statutory minimum wage will be lowered from 23 to 21 years.
Dismissal protection for people with temporary work is being improved.
There will be a clear dismissal law with short procedures.
Dismissal protection for sick and partially disabled employees is being strengthened.
Long-term unemployment is prevented by guiding employees from job to job.
Unemployment benefits (WW) will be increased to 90 percent of the last earned salary in the first half of the year and will amount to 80 percent in the second half of the year.
The maximum unemployment benefit period is one year and the daily wage is capped at an average salary.
Flexible workers will have faster access to unemployment benefits.
All employees receive an individual training budget.
These training rights are financed by employers and are fiscally stimulated.
The life-course arrangement and the savings scheme will be included.
This also applies to existing severance payments and the continued employment bonus.
If employees have not been given sufficient training opportunities by their employer, they are entitled to compensation upon dismissal.
They must spend this on education or use it as working capital if they opt for self-employment.
Employers and unions will take the quality of low-paid work, training, career development and working longer seriously.
Only development collective labour agreements that contain firm agreements on life-cycle-conscious personnel policy will be declared generally binding in the future.
There will be mandatory quotas for the number of partially disabled people that employers (with the exception of small businesses and organisations) must employ.
The employment of partially disabled people will be more encouraged and facilitated.
Employers will be made more aware of existing schemes with this objective.
10. Employees' say over working hours and working from home will be increased, where possible, with a legal right to work from home.
11. Work and care are distributed more fairly between men and women.
Financial benefits for breadwinner families in taxes and social security will be abolished.
There will be an extension of maternity leave for partners from 2 days to 2 weeks, better payment for parental leave and more extensive paid care leave.
12. Parents are entitled to childcare allowance for the number of hours they participate plus travel time.
It is up to them to choose between childcare, crèche or after-school care.
Childcare remains accessible for low incomes.
If necessary, the parental contribution will be increased for higher incomes.
The waiting lists are being eliminated,
the quality of childcare is improved
and the opening hours will be extended.
Schools all offer a day package for children with all kinds of activities, sufficient exercise, healthy food and professional guidance.
13. The Netherlands is committed to a future-proof social Europe.
That is why the government is calling for binding European agreements on:
a) increasing the labour market participation of women, older people, ethnic minorities, people with disabilities or chronic illnesses and young people who are not studying;
b) placing under guardianship countries whose failed policies endanger the stability of the euro;
c) a continuous programme for poverty reduction, which benefits first and foremost the poorest in all EU Member States.
This will be tested regularly;
d) removing barriers to working, living and studying in another EU country, including for migrants with a permanent residence permit;
e) a common labour migration policy that gives migrants from outside the EU the opportunity to work in understaffed sectors, punishes exploitation and promotes labour mobility;
f) setting reasonable requirements in government tenders, so that smaller companies also have a fair chance to carry out government contracts.
14. In order to promote equal assessment and promotion of men and women, at least 30 percent of the top management of listed companies and (semi)public institutions should be women.
This requires quotas.
15. The government is pursuing an active preferential policy to strengthen the representation of ethnic minorities in top public positions and is also making agreements with the business community on this matter.
16. Employee empowerment is strengthened.
At least one third of the members of Supervisory Boards are elected by the employees once every four years.
Supervisory Board members can remain in office for a maximum of 10 years.
The maximum number of RvC memberships is 5 per person.
The position of the works council is further strengthened by, among other things, giving the works council the right to approve all employment conditions (unless these are regulated in a collective labor agreement),
advisory rights on important investment decisions, important policy reserves and the allocation of profits
and an enhanced right to advise on the appointment and dismissal of the director.
In good companies, the rewards for ordinary employees and the salaries of top executives do not differ.
Employees and managers together make the company.
When someone wins, everyone gets a share.
17. Poverty hits hard, especially for children.
Poverty is reduced by encouraging the labour participation of single parents and low-educated women.
Municipalities must provide sufficient opportunities for part-time work and childcare through tailor-made solutions.
Child benefit will become income-dependent, so that government subsidies go where they are needed most.
18. The number of people with problem debts will be significantly reduced through accessible debt assistance and prevention.
There will be an advertising ban for consumer credit.
In addition, credit providers will be required to contribute to debt assistance.
Anyone who needs debt assistance will receive it within a period of 4 weeks.
19. An Investment in People Act (WIM) will be introduced that will combine the Social Assistance Act (WWB), the Youth Investment Act (WIJ), the Wajong Act and parts of the Social Assistance Act (WSW) into a new scheme in which participation is central.
The core of the WIM is that anyone who has been unemployed for more than a year and no longer receives unemployment benefits enters into a participation contract with the municipality, in return for compensation of at least the statutory minimum wage, without an asset or partner test.
Municipalities are given the opportunity to make individual agreements about, for example, education, guidance towards work, adapted work, volunteer work, informal care or care for chronically ill children or children with a disability.
What people can do is central.
In all cases, community money is matched by an obligation to participate according to one's ability.
Municipalities are obliged to appoint an Ombudsman WIM, so that every citizen gets his due.
20. The insurance against partial disability (WIA/WGA) will be improved by amending the Assessment Decree, so that serious health problems are taken into account.
21. There will be a social and flexible AOW.
Participation becomes the starting point.
The current country of residence principle of 50 years will be replaced by a participation principle of 45 years.
Low-skilled workers who start working early, often in a demanding job, can therefore receive state pension earlier than highly educated workers who start working later.
Everyone who has participated in Dutch society for 45 years is entitled to a full AOW benefit.
You build up AOW rights when:
a) you are over 18 years old and earn more than 50 percent of the statutory minimum wage.
If you earn less, you build up your benefits pro rata.
If you study at a higher education institution, you do not build up an AOW pension;
b) you use a public leave scheme, unemployment scheme, disability scheme, the Investment in People Act (WIM) or the starter's deduction;
c) you care for children up to the age of 5 or provide informal care.
These years of care count for half in accordance with the WW.
The right to AOW is offset by an obligation to participate.
Anyone who is unable to participate due to force majeure – disability, unemployment, intensive care tasks – will build up full AOW benefits.
Anyone who does not wish to participate because he or she has sufficient assets or other sources of income will no longer build up free AOW.
Of course, that person can continue to insure themselves voluntarily for a full AOW pension for a fee.
The new AOW pension will come into effect after 45 years of work or at the age of 67.
People who have not built up sufficient AOW and supplementary pension by the age of 67 will be supplemented to the subsistence level.
The assets and partner test applies here.
The new AOW only applies to the younger generations, to people born after 1972.
This is in line with the pursuit of economic independence that has been the starting point of government policy for this generation since 1990.
AOW rights that were built up under the old system are converted into a fictitious employment history and count towards the new AOW.
A scheme will be introduced for people who perform low-paid and heavy work but who, because they have lived outside the Netherlands for part of their lives, have never been able to build up a Dutch employment history of 45 years.
22. Seniors with a good income will soon start contributing to the AOW.
Elderly people with a meager pension are spared and receive additional income support.
23. The pension system is being modernized:
a) Pension schemes will become more flexible, with more scope to build up a pension more quickly at the start of your career.
b) Pension funds are encouraged to invest the funds entrusted to them in a socially responsible manner.
c) Diversity in the boards of pension funds is encouraged.
It is especially necessary to strengthen the position of young people.
d) The tax framework for pension accrual will be tightened and the pension base will be capped at an income of one and a half times the modal income.
24. The position of self-employed persons and their access to social security will be improved:
a) Self-employed persons will have access to industry-wide pension funds.
b) The hours criterion for self-employed persons is abolished and replaced by an income criterion.
This stimulates part-time entrepreneurship.
c) Self-employed persons will be entitled to a more extensive education deduction.
d) If necessary, self-employed persons can rely on the Investment in People Act (WIM) without first having to use up and consume their pension provision.
25. In the inheritance tax tariff, the fiscal subordination of single persons should be reduced in a budget-neutral manner.
25. An active information campaign on the rights of people without valid residence documents to basic services, such as medical care, access to shelter and the right of their children to education, will be launched for professionals working in the relevant sectors and for advocates working with undocumented persons.
Weekend schools for disadvantaged students, students taking at-risk students under their wing, and parents working together to mix black and white schools.
These are private initiatives that deserve full support, but more is needed to guarantee that every child in the Netherlands has the same opportunities for good education.
All children – regardless of their parents’ education level, income or surname – should be able to develop their talents.
In these financially difficult times, GroenLinks has chosen to invest billions extra in education.
Right now, right there.
To emerge strong from the crisis, we must improve education.
It is the basis of the knowledge economy that the Netherlands wants to be and investments in education always pay off.
But schools are more than suppliers of labor.
They are also the place where children are formed into free and active citizens.
Where their talents can flourish.
And where they are equipped to build an independent existence.
Additional investments are needed, especially in primary education and (preparatory) vocational education.
Due to a lack of individual attention, many children from poor and migrant families are never able to catch up on their language and learning deficits.
Even smart people and bright minds are not sufficiently challenged.
Most children get through their school years just fine.
But the 40,000 young people who leave education every year without a diploma face an uncertain future.
Teachers play a central role in the lives of children.
Teachers who put their heart and soul into their work give children opportunities that they sometimes do not get at home.
But it is not easy to stand in front of the class with passion again and again.
Certainly not if you are overloaded.
To make teaching more attractive, the workload must be reduced.
Additional support staff or smaller classes should ensure that teachers can give all children sufficient attention.
That high achievers can do more and that there is extra guidance for students who need it.
And that more time is freed up for the teachers themselves for regular training and developing lessons.
To achieve this, additional money is needed in the education budget.
At the same time, the current budget can also be spent better.
Too much money is spent on managers, top salaries of directors and prestige projects or remains in the reserves of the schools.
That money also has to go to the classroom.
GroenLinks wants toddlers to be able to attend a pre-school program at every primary school.
There they learn new words in a playful way, so that they can start primary school with a rich vocabulary.
The organization of schools affects not only the students, but also their parents.
If eating lunch at home becomes the norm and after-school care is a stressful hassle, many parents will work less than they would like to.
That is undesirable.
Primary schools should therefore become comprehensive schools, with long opening hours and a wide range of music, sports and recreational facilities.
The School in Zandvoort is a good example.
This primary school is open all day, all year round and children learn at their own pace.
Such initiatives deserve extra encouragement.
Of all young people, 60 percent go to vocational education.
They are the carpenters, caregivers, secretaries and electricians of the future.
They are the people who benefit the shortest from our publicly funded education system and even those limited years of education are not used to their full potential.
For years, pre-vocational secondary education (VMBO) and intermediate vocational education (MBO) schools have been neglected.
The average education level of teachers is declining, as is the percentage of teaching staff in the total.
The result is that more and more lessons are given by instructors and practical supervisors who do not always have a teaching qualification.
And it can easily happen that a teacher who is trained to teach technology also teaches English and mathematics.
This does not always benefit the quality of education.
Moreover, students in pre-vocational secondary education (VMBO) and intermediate vocational education (MBO) also receive too little personal guidance.
The economic crisis is also causing a shortage of internships and work-study positions, which makes it more difficult to complete the training.
In addition to primary education, GroenLinks will therefore give priority to investments in pre-vocational secondary education (VMBO) and intermediate vocational education (MBO) in the coming years:
for more and better equipped teachers,
with sufficient time for their students.
That is the best way to give perspective to our young people and to prevent tens of thousands of drop-outs.
The Netherlands wants to become one of the best knowledge economies in the world.
This is only possible if top-level education becomes just as important as top-level research.
It is therefore incomprehensible that in a third of all studies at colleges and universities, students receive less than 10 hours of lessons per week.
You can also improve education at colleges and universities by focusing on more capable and academically trained teachers who have enough time and attention for each student.
In turn, students should also be able to spend more time on their studies.
GroenLinks wants to improve their financial position.
This means they have to spend fewer hours on a part-time job, leaving them more time to study.
Billions extra will go to education.
This money is mainly invested in primary education and (preparatory) vocational education.
GroenLinks calls for a National Education Agreement in which the government, administrators, teachers, parents and students work together to ensure an education sector that gives every student sufficient attention and guidance.
Working in primary and (preparatory) vocational education is being made more attractive.
The workload is reduced.
Teachers teach fewer hours, have smaller classes and/or better support from classroom assistants, specialist subject teachers and caretakers.
This gives teachers more time per student.
The agreements from the Teacher Action Plan will be implemented in full.
This means that agreements must also be made for vocational education about when teachers can claim higher pay and additional training.
In addition to the Action Plan, agreements are made on additional remuneration for teachers who teach many students with learning disabilities.
The number of unqualified teachers and leaders in the classroom, at preschools and in after-school care will be reduced.
Parents will have more say in school policy, for example by strengthening the position of participation councils.
Teaching teams will have more influence on the education to be provided.
They determine the teaching method and have a say in new pedagogical concepts.
A range of preschool programs will be offered throughout the country to combat and prevent disadvantages in toddlers.
All primary schools will become comprehensive schools.
The application of the broad school concept is also encouraged in secondary education.
Comprehensive schools provide a program from seven to seven.
There is room for sports, art, drama and outdoor play, if possible in nature.
Before-, between- and after-school care is provided by expert pedagogical staff.
The comprehensive school works together with youth care and health services to quickly identify and address problems.
Investments are being made in good educational buildings that are climate neutral, guarantee a good indoor climate and are a good workplace for students and teachers.
9. Vmbo and MBO schools will perform better:
a) The standard of 850 hours of educational activities per year for secondary vocational education courses is better implemented and complied with.
b) More intervention is provided in courses that are assessed as weak.
Courses that are very weak will have their teaching license revoked after one year.
c) There will be a maximum standard for overhead and stricter supervision of the finances of institutions.
d) Dropping out of school is prevented by giving young people who are at risk of dropping out their own coach or study supervisor and by improving cooperation with care providers.
e) Schools will work together better to improve the transition from pre-vocational secondary education (VMBO) to intermediate vocational education (MBO).
The merging of these two types of education in, for example, broad vocational schools is promoted.
f) Small scale is encouraged.
g) More students leave secondary vocational education with the highest diploma (MBO-4).
10 Every student in vocational education has the right to an internship or work-study position.
To this end: a) schools are legally obliged to arrange an internship or work-study placement for young people who, through no fault of their own, have not been able to do so.
Schools may not dismiss any student due to the lack of an internship or work-study position;
b) companies must offer at least 1 internship or work-study position per 50 employees;
c) companies that offer many internship or work-study positions will receive fiscal incentives.
d) vocational (technical) training courses are created in the field of heating and cooling technology and sustainable energy, among other things, so that young people can immediately start working in the green economy.
11. Adult education can play an important role in the integration of newcomers, combating illiteracy, the acquisition of the Dutch language and the successful re-entry into the labour market of, for example, welfare mothers.
In particular, regional training centres (ROCs), but also secondary education, colleges and universities must offer accessible learning paths to adults and thus better facilitate lifelong learning.
A plan is being developed to reduce (functional) illiteracy to a minimum within 10 years.
12. Early selection in Dutch education, which has particularly negative consequences for disadvantaged pupils, will be reduced by:
a) to encourage progression from lower to higher education and the stacking of education, and to enable continuous learning paths and flexible school careers.
This means, among other things, that there will be more broad bridge classes, that curriculums will be better aligned and that progression requirements will be transparent and objective;
b) to test all children, but to only use test scores (such as Cito scores) as a selection criterion if they are based on progress tests taken at different times during primary school;
c) the structural formation of more head classes and bridging classes (in primary school) and foot classes (in secondary school), so that pupils who still have language deficiencies at the end of group 8 can follow an extra year of education;
d) to experiment with junior colleges for children aged 11 to 14.
A junior college diploma gives access to all types of further education and combines the strengths of primary education, such as one or two permanent teachers, with those of secondary education, such as in-depth content.
13. Segregation in education is combated by:
a) an acceptance obligation for special education.
Students who respect the school's foundation are admitted;
b) a fixed registration date for primary education, which promotes placing children in schools in their own neighbourhood;
c) an obligation for municipalities and school boards to make non-binding agreements on combating segregation.
The Education Inspectorate monitors the quality of the agreements and their implementation by schools.
14. Sexual education in education also pays attention to sexual resilience, sexual diversity, human rights, acceptance and safety.
15. Education contributes to breaking through role patterns in career choices.
It is becoming more attractive for men to work in primary education, childcare and pre-school.
The teacher training colleges are once again placing knowledge development and substantive professional knowledge central.
In addition to basic teacher training, teacher training colleges are also given the opportunity to offer specializations, such as for upper secondary education in primary education.
16. Regular schools provide appropriate education to everyone as much as possible, regardless of disabilities.
Schools and teachers receive support to provide good education to all students.
17. Accessibility to higher education is increased by generous study grants in the form of a study salary.
Students can study without fear of loans, big part-time jobs and without being financially dependent on their parents.
The scholarship is financed from a low and income-related higher education tax for former students.
The amount of this tax depends on the number of years of study, so studying quickly pays off.
18. The quality of higher education will be strengthened.
Education is intensified by increasing the teacher/student ratio and the number of contact hours.
The professionalization of teachers is receiving more attention.
19. Foreign students will have easier access to our higher education.
20. Agreements are made with colleges and universities to provide more career opportunities for young people, women and migrants.
21. There will be no cuts in research.
More is being invested in knowledge development in the areas of energy, climate and efficient use of natural resources.
22. At European level, the Netherlands strives to ensure that:
a) a greater share of the EU budget is spent on education, research and development;
b) an Erasmus grant will be available to all students, which will cover the additional costs of a year of study at a foreign educational institution;
c) the results of publicly funded research are made freely accessible;
d) small and medium-sized enterprises can more easily compete for research and development funds, so that knowledge development is also promoted here.
A major bank is leading the way in new ways of working.
The company has an energy-efficient head office close to the station and helped pay for a bicycle bridge over the railway.
Employees can choose when and where they work: at home, on the train or at the office.
They have a clean company car, but also a train pass.
At an energy company in Rotterdam, the employees live in the vicinity of the office.
For business trips they take the shared car around the corner.
And in Utrecht, shops are supplied with electric carts instead of dirty trucks.
Enterprising frontrunners have long been working and traveling green.
We must make their example the rule.
Everyone wants to live well in a safe environment.
Being mobile.
Enjoy peace and nature close to home.
With over 16 million people in a small country, that's quite a puzzle.
It is possible.
But not if you let spatial planning deteriorate and increase investments in asphalt, as previous cabinets have done.
GroenLinks wants to preserve space in our country and make transport greener.
If we want to keep space for nature, water, recreation and characteristic Dutch landscapes, we should not further clutter the countryside, but look for places to live and work within built-up areas.
In this way we can bring living and working places closer together and connect them better.
This requires strict management by the national government and the provinces.
Every village has its own industrial estate, that is really no longer possible.
There is still space in cities and villages.
We can convert empty office buildings, churches and factories into modern homes.
Energy-efficient, but also suitable for lifelong living: both grandma and her student grandson should be able to live there.
‘Building in the meadow’ is now cheaper than new construction in the city.
It should be the other way around.
GroenLinks wants to promote compact construction with a levy on the use of open space.
Traveling is part of a multifaceted life.
But traffic also takes its toll.
Unhealthy air, greenhouse gases, noise, accidents, traffic jams and an average of three parking spaces per car.
We must therefore try to avoid unnecessary travel.
And clean and economical transport must become the most attractive choice for travellers.
To this end, the inconvenience of traveling must be included in the price.
GroenLinks is a great supporter of the kilometer charge.
Anyone who drives in busy places or at busy times, or in a dirty car, will pay a higher rate.
Because there really is no room in the city for more roads and parking spaces.
A lower rate applies in sparsely populated areas.
There the car is often the best alternative.
In the rest of the Netherlands, public transport should be the best choice for longer distances.
Cheaper than a car, often and quickly, reliable and comfortable.
The trick lies mainly in the network in the urban regions.
That has to improve.
Travelers can then transfer smoothly between the train and the (public) bicycle, light rail, trams or buses.
Or between the train and the (shared) car, at P+R sites with good connections to public transport.
RandstadRail, between The Hague and Rotterdam, is a shining example.
GroenLinks opts for a city where the cyclist is king and the pedestrian is emperor.
A city where cars and scooters increasingly run on electricity.
To accelerate the transition to electric driving, a network of charging points is needed.
If we are smart, we will immediately build a local energy grid that matches supply and demand for green energy.
The energy from your solar panels is then stored in your neighbor's car battery.
For many people, happiness begins at home, in a nice house, a safe neighborhood and green surroundings.
But in some neighborhoods, the quality of life is spoiled by nuisance and crime.
Stricter supervision is needed there.
Police officers, city guards and janitors who know what's going on can prevent a lot of mess.
We can only achieve more police on the streets if we free officers from the paperwork.
And of the senseless fight against soft drugs.
GroenLinks wants to make cannabis cultivation and coffee shops a normal industry, with permits and cannabis excise duties.
The police and judiciary can then focus on shoplifting, street robberies, burglaries and domestic violence.
A higher chance of being caught and faster punishment deters criminals.
The police cannot make a neighborhood liveable alone.
In more and more municipalities, residents are doing their bit.
They are trained to mediate in cases of nuisance and conflicts.
They help decide how the residents' budget should be spent: a living room for the elderly or more green space to play in.
GroenLinks wants to strongly promote these types of initiatives.
But more is needed to help disadvantaged neighborhoods move forward.
The individual disadvantaged position of many residents must be addressed through education and work.
Greater residential happiness also requires better flow on the housing market.
Nowadays, first-time buyers often cannot find a home because the cheapest homes remain occupied.
GroenLinks therefore wants to tackle skewed rents.
Those who remain in social housing despite a good income will pay more rent.
Or buys his home.
If you move, the housing association can buy back the home.
In this way, government money reaches the lowest incomes, neighbourhoods remain mixed and a large social housing sector is created with hundreds of thousands of affordable homes.
Such 'residential' variants, between renting and buying, are urgently needed, because owner-occupied homes are often unaffordable at the moment.
The mortgage interest deduction benefits higher incomes, drives up prices and costs the government a lot of money.
A gradual phasing out of this deduction is inevitable.
In the long term, the owner-occupied home tax can be phased out, as can the transfer tax when selling a house.
This way we create less debt and there is more flow.
The Minister of Sustainability and Spatial Planning is responsible for spatial planning in broad terms.
The central government determines the boundaries within which municipalities may build in their own region.
The central government is introducing an open space levy.
Project developers pay this once when they build on green space.
In real estate tax (ozb), spatial use will carry more weight.
Houses are built as much as possible within the boundaries of cities and towns and near public transport hubs.
A Sustainable Structure Strengthening Fund is being established.
All the money for infrastructure and spatial investments goes into one pot, from which integrated plans for traffic and housing are financed.
This means less money goes to asphalt and more to public transport and urban improvement.
The Netherlands is sufficiently protected against wet feet, precisely by giving water space.
The rule of thumb here is: first hold, then store, and only then remove.
The new opportunities that water storage offers for nature and recreation are being exploited.
Rivers are being widened.
At least 500,000 new homes will be built in the Randstad by 2040, largely within the existing city and village boundaries.
These homes are energy neutral or generate energy.
The government encourages new homes to take into account different phases of life and to be easily adaptable for people with disabilities.
Vacancy of offices no longer results in tax deductions.
Vacancy for more than 1 year will be punished with a vacancy tax.
This promotes the conversion of empty offices into homes.
10. In shrinking municipalities, the government does not try to maintain the population, but rather the facilities, such as education, healthcare and shops.
The distribution key of the Municipal Fund is being adjusted for the benefit of shrinking municipalities.
The regional economic policy responds to the opportunities for shrinkage in sectors such as nature, recreation, business services, creative industry and healthcare.
11. Cycling is strongly encouraged.
There will be more station bicycle sheds and public transport bicycles.
Municipalities and provinces must comply with quality standards for bicycle facilities.
They invest in good cycling facilities, such as comfortable, safe and fast cycle routes.
The subsidy that municipalities receive from the central government for cycling infrastructure is being increased.
12. Sustainable door-to-door transport will be made possible by making it easier and free to take a bicycle or disabled vehicle on the train, especially during rush hour.
13. Rail transport will receive a major boost: extra train capacity, passing tracks, better stations and better maintenance of tracks and trains.
The routes where trains will run at high frequency will be extended beyond the Randstad.
In addition, experiments with night trains are being started in several regions outside the Randstad, following the Brabant example.
14. There will be a new railway line from Almere via Utrecht to Breda (AUB) and better train connections to Germany and Belgium.
15. The Netherlands starts a tram offensive.
In metropolitan regions, regional trains, metro, light rail and express bus will form a coherent network of metro quality.
Waiting and transfer times are becoming shorter.
Travel information is comprehensive and up-to-date.
16. Public transport is tendered in larger areas, so that it is less fragmented.
User requirements, sustainability and quality become important starting points, which will sometimes cost a little more.
17. Public transport will be more accessible for the elderly, the disabled and people with children.
18. The strip card will only be abolished once the public transport chip card functions perfectly.
Privacy is guaranteed: data may only be used in cases of suspicion of serious crimes, anonymised for investigation or if the traveller actively gives permission.
Travelers who value their privacy should not suffer any financial disadvantage as a result.
19. The central government is steering public transport fares and (car) taxes in such a way that clean and economical transport and working from home become more attractive.
Sustainable freight transport by rail and inland waterway is specifically stimulated.
20. The Netherlands is taking the lead internationally in improving cross-border public transport, as well as in introducing a European train planner with a booking system, also for bicycles and wheelchairs.
21. The kilometer charge will be introduced as soon as possible, whereby:
a) the mileage rates make a significant difference between environmentally polluting and economical vehicles;
b) freight transport becomes more expensive;
c) a higher rate applies in busy places and during rush hour;
d) privacy is beyond doubt: the police and judiciary will not have access to travel data;
e) the proceeds are used to reduce labour costs.
22. The allowance for commuting will fall under the normal tax regime.
The current exemption will be gradually phased out over a period of 5 years.
23. The purchase tax for cars will not be reduced further and will be significantly differentiated based on environmental impact.
Because of the space that cars take up, there must be a brake on car ownership.
24. Car sharing is gaining a mature place in the Dutch transport system.
The car does not necessarily have to be in front of the door.
25. Driving on fossil fuels will be replaced as soon as possible by driving on green electricity or other sustainable energy sources.
Buyers of electric cars can get a low-threshold loan, which is repaid with their fuel savings.
Taxis are going electric.
26. The Netherlands is campaigning in Brussels for the strictest possible environmental standards for vehicles, including a maximum of 80 grams of CO2 per kilometre in 2020 for new passenger cars.
27. There will be no new roads that will further fragment our country.
So no A4 Midden-Delfland either.
The peak hour rate in the kilometer charge should make new road widening unnecessary.
Where necessary for the environment and/or to prevent noise pollution, the maximum speed is increased to 80 or 100 km per hour.
28. Experiments will be conducted to make roads more sustainable, for example by using roofs and combinations with the production of green energy.
29. The growth of Schiphol and regional airports will be stopped.
Twente Airport will not be built.
There will be a tax on flying.
The Netherlands is strongly committed to the introduction of a kerosene tax within Europe, comparable to the excise duty on petrol and other fuels.
30. The Netherlands is using its strong market position to play a pioneering role in making inland and maritime shipping cleaner, for example by making port charges dependent on the environmental performance of the shipping company and by offering green energy on shore.
Within the EU, the Netherlands is strongly committed to the introduction of an excise duty on heavy fuel oil.
31. Tenants can, under certain conditions, purchase their home from the housing association.
If the corporation opts for a right of repurchase (anti-speculation clause), the tenant can purchase the home at a discount.
32. Those who continue to live in social housing despite a good income will pay more rent.
33. Tenants of (student) rooms and people in residential groups are entitled to housing benefit.
34. Rent assessment committees will have more options to tackle landlords who do not comply with the rules.
35. Squatting is not prohibited.
36. The activities of housing associations must primarily be related to their social objective: maintaining a stock of affordable housing for low-income households.
Municipalities make performance agreements with housing associations, including on energy savings and investments in the neighbourhood.
Separating social and commercial activities of corporations ensures that they continue to invest in facilities, such as shops, that make buildings and neighbourhoods more liveable.
37. In new construction, private clients are given free rein.
38. The mortgage interest deduction will be gradually abolished.
The amount of mortgage debt on which interest can be deducted is capped and gradually reduced to zero.
The value of one's own home will gradually be included in the wealth tax, with an exemption equal to the value of an average home.
At the same time, the owner-occupied home tax and transfer tax are being gradually phased out.
39. The exemption from the owner-occupied home tax for homeowners without a mortgage (Hillen Act) will expire.
The capital insurance for owner-occupied homes will no longer be tax-exempt for new cases and the owner-occupied home tax rate will not be indexed.
40. Homeowners who are at risk of losing their homes due to financial problems will be given the opportunity to transfer their homes or mortgages to the government, under fair terms regarding rent or repayments.
This applies to homeowners with a mortgage up to the level of the National Mortgage Guarantee.
41. Client-driven housing initiatives in which ex-clients who know what it is like to be homeless offer help to the homeless are successful and need to be expanded.
A scheme will be introduced that will generously finance such housing initiatives.
42. The police are there to make living and working environments safer.
Bureaucratic red tape is kept to a minimum and taken over by competent administrative police personnel.
The manpower thus released is deployed for neighbourhood-oriented policing.
The police are no longer judged on the number of tickets issued.
43. The successful initiatives with trained (young) volunteers who mediate in nuisance and conflicts in the neighborhood are being followed up.
44. The national government and municipalities provide residents and neighbourhood budgets so that residents can participate in decisions about investments in liveability in neighbourhoods where necessary.
45. Soft drugs are legalized, the supply of hard drugs is regulated.
There will be intensive information about drug use.
46. ​​Technologies to monitor people without suspicion, such as smart cameras, should only be used in cases of extreme necessity and after a strict human rights assessment.
Laws and regulations that allow such surveillance expire after 2 years.
More and more elderly people are choosing Thuishuizen.
With the help of volunteers and care in the neighbourhood, they can live independently for longer, in the company of others.
Children with intellectual disabilities live in Thomas houses.
Each home is managed by two ‘care entrepreneurs’: married couples who live there themselves and, together with the parents, guide and care for the children.
It is the kind of tailor-made care you would wish for everyone.
Good care is a basic need that should be accessible and affordable for everyone.
The government therefore monitors quality and access by setting conditions and imposing requirements on healthcare providers.
Any profit motive must be excluded.
Healthcare costs a lot of money, but it is worth it.
Healthcare should not be cut back on.
The needs are too great for that, especially in elderly and disabled care.
Additional funding is needed to make the transition to care closer to home, where people retain as much control as possible.
At the same time, care must be organised better, cheaper and fairer.
By making healthcare more income-dependent, we kill two birds with one stone:
the strongest shoulders bear the heaviest burdens
and the bureaucratic health care allowance can be abolished.
Children, young people and parents who need help with growing up and raising their children should be able to find support close to home.
A specialized youth worker provides first aid and works together with the family and their own network to solve the problems.
Only when children are not safe in their own environment will they be removed from home and preferably placed in a foster family.
Elderly people, the chronically ill and people with disabilities prefer to live and work in their own neighbourhood and as independently as possible.
Even when people become dependent on care and support, they want to retain as much control over their lives as possible.
GroenLinks therefore wants to make it easier to opt for personal budgets.
Of course, there will also continue to be good support for those who cannot or do not want to arrange care themselves.
Municipalities will receive additional funding to expand home care and small-scale facilities in the neighbourhood, such as day care for elderly people with dementia.
By offering good support to informal caregivers, the strength of their own network of family, friends and neighbours is better utilised and care is organised as locally as possible.
Even if you can no longer live at home, you still want to be able to determine your life as much as possible.
When you shower, what you eat and when you visit friends or go to the cinema.
This requires more hands at the table and at bedside, as well as additional income support.
GroenLinks invests in more staff, in training and in the attractiveness of the nursing profession.
In return for this investment, healthcare institutions will organize care on a smaller scale and offer it in a more customized manner.
In many cases this turns out to be cheaper than care in large nursing homes.
In small-scale care facilities, for example, people can more easily rely on their own network.
Medical procedures that could easily be performed by nurses are now performed by doctors.
Expensive specialists do work that a general practitioner is also qualified to do.
This makes the healthcare sector unnecessarily expensive and complicated.
By delegating more tasks to general practitioners and nurses, care becomes more efficient and their work more interesting.
Costs can be further reduced by curbing the excessive remuneration of some specialists
and to employ new specialists.
But also by strengthening primary care and organizing care closer to people, in their own neighborhood, with home care, general practitioner and district nurse.
People who now fall back on the AWBZ often automatically end up in large healthcare institutions.
To change this, GroenLinks wants to give health insurers a greater role in the implementation of public healthcare.
Health insurers must operate on a non-profit basis and are required to cooperate with municipalities to provide healthcare facilities in the neighbourhood.
A personal budget guarantees the freedom to choose: admission to a large nursing home or care nearby.
Prevention is the best health care.
Over the past twenty years, the number of overweight children has doubled: one in five girls and one in seven boys is overweight.
Healthy living should therefore become easier and cheaper.
GroenLinks wants school canteens to offer not only fatty salty snacks but also healthy sandwiches
and that children receive three hours of gym class per week.
It is important that people with a low income can better find their way to additional municipal facilities.
More income creates room for a healthier lifestyle.
The food industry must be held accountable for its social responsibility and reduce bad fats, salt and irresponsible advertising.
The law stipulates that institutions that work with public (healthcare) funds always have a permit and are not for profit.
This applies to health insurers and healthcare providers, such as home care agencies.
The permit sets requirements regarding, among other things, the quality of care, patient participation, staff training and salaries.
Medical expenses are paid in solidarity.
That means that:
a) the nominal premium will be reduced and the financing of care will become more income-dependent;
b) the health care allowance becomes redundant;
c) the deductible becomes income-dependent.
3. Youth care will be improved by:
a) to organize these nearby.
Municipalities will be given control over youth care, such as parenting support at home.
Municipalities are responsible for a comprehensive supply of specialized youth workers who provide direct support, in collaboration with their own environment;
b) make youth workers responsible for referrals to specialized youth care;
c) to bundle the various financing streams for youth care;
d) to promote foster care so that vulnerable children and young people grow up in a family environment as much as possible and do not end up in an institution;
e) to pay more attention to (migrant) young people who end up in judicial youth care, while in many cases they would be better served with mental health care;
f) to strengthen the right to have a say in youth care for young people and (foster) parents;
g) to improve the substantive expertise of youth care, including with regard to domestic, sexual, honour-related and anti-gay violence;
h) no longer placing children without a criminal conviction in correctional facilities.
4. The elderly, the chronically ill and people with disabilities are given maximum control over their own lives:
a) Personal management is encouraged by the use of personal budgets for people who want it.
b) There will be one independent indication for care, education, work and income.
c) Municipalities are obliged to support participation as broadly as possible
and receive additional – earmarked – resources to organize small-scale neighborhood facilities.
This compensates for the recent cuts in the AWBZ.
d) Informal caregivers receive better support from municipalities, for example by being able to be replaced occasionally by professional and volunteer caregivers.
e) In home care tenders, quality and continuity should be paramount.
Housing and care are separated.
The residential component is removed from the AWBZ.
People living in an institution will have more control over their housing costs and the way they live.
People with a lower income are compensated for this through housing benefit and do not lose income.
There will be an assets test in the AWBZ.
The resident contributions that institutions request for long-term care are capped so that residents have the financial scope to participate in society.
More investment is being made in staff, training and career opportunities in long-term care.
In return, nursing and care institutions and institutions for the disabled and mental health care commit to concrete plans to stimulate small-scale operations and improve cost efficiency.
Care in the neighborhood and district becomes central.
Primary care is being strengthened.
The establishment of small-scale health centres is encouraged, involving a pharmacy, general practitioners, district nurses and other healthcare providers.
Care that can be provided by the general practitioner no longer takes place in the hospital.
10. Work in healthcare will become more interesting and efficient through a redistribution of tasks for medical specialists, doctors, nurses and paramedics.
11. The system for healthcare declarations, the diagnosis-treatment combination (DBC), is being drastically simplified.
Medical confidentiality is respected.
12. Medical specialists will become salaried employees and will be included under the remuneration code for the healthcare sector.
13. Doctors are encouraged to prescribe the cheaper version of a medicine.
If there are medical reasons to choose a more expensive variant, it will be prescribed in line with independent quality guidelines.
14. Innovation and medical technology are becoming more focused on prevention and cost control.
15. Non-profit health insurers will play a central role in the implementation of the public basic insurance.
Clients are given a significant voice in the management of these institutions.
16. Health insurers may negotiate about a larger share of hospital care,
provided that a budget control instrument and legal quality requirements are introduced.
17. Long-term care (AWBZ) will be transferred to the public basic insurance as much as possible.
Health insurers are required to work together with municipalities to provide care facilities that make it possible to live at home longer.
18. In order to increase the number of organ donors, the active donor registration system is introduced: people are donors unless they indicate that they do not want to be.
19. High-quality alternative care that meets requirements in the areas of effectiveness, training, quality policy and complaints procedure will remain exempt from VAT.
20. Within the care sector, more attention will be paid to people who are struggling with an accumulation of problems.
21. As long as privacy is not watertight, the electronic patient file will not be introduced.
22. Abortion and euthanasia are not ordinary medical treatments.
That is why it is good to impose additional requirements in a separate law on doctors who have to deal with this.
But in the current situation, doctors who perform an abortion or euthanasia are in principle punishable unless they adhere to medical regulations.
GroenLinks wants to turn that around.
Doctors are only punishable after it has been demonstrated that they have not complied with the rules, such as the 24-week period for abortion and the consultation of an independent and specialized doctor in the case of euthanasia.
Abortion and euthanasia should therefore be removed from the criminal code.
23. GroenLinks advocates a social and political debate on the question of whether the current euthanasia law offers sufficient scope for elderly people suffering from irreversible loss of human dignity to take control over their lives.
24. Within the EU, the Netherlands is strongly committed to an exemption from VAT for healthy food, such as fresh fruit and vegetables.
25. Agreements are made with municipalities and the business community regarding free advice to people with a low income on improving living conditions and better use of facilities that municipalities have for this purpose.
For example, accounting firms can adopt neighborhoods with a high proportion of low incomes and offer their support services to residents.
26. Schools are obliged to organize healthy school canteens and sufficient sports facilities for their students.
27. Binding agreements will be made with the food industry on a ban on advertising sweets for children under 12 and on reducing bad fats and salt in food.
If necessary, legislation will be introduced.
28. Legislation, regulations and pricing measures will prevent health damage caused by smoking and excessive alcohol consumption as much as possible.
29. Sexual and reproductive health is promoted by paying sufficient attention to sexuality education in education.
The overdue treatment will be removed from the abortion law.
The mandatory reflection period for abortions will be abolished.
In those parts of the Caribbean that will become Dutch territory, abortion will be practiced in a responsible manner.
30. The government states that the contraceptive pill must remain in the basic health insurance package.
Sexual health care and abortion are accessible to everyone, regardless of residence permit.
31. (Semi)public institutions must implement an effective anti-bullying policy and are facilitated in this.
The girls with headscarves at our universities.
The lesbian couple who run a household together with the biological father of their child.
The pastor who doesn't believe in God.
The MP who stands up for the freedom of expression of her fiercest opponent.
They all show that the Netherlands is still a liberal country.
The last cabinets had little regard for our liberal tradition.
GroenLinks is actually proud of it.
For centuries, our country has been a leader in religious freedom.
You can still decide for yourself what you do and do not believe in.
Freethinking also means that you stand for reasonableness and dialogue.
For an open society with respect for human rights and minorities.
So there are limits: no violence,
no discrimination,
no coercion of faith.
The polarization surrounding migrants and Muslims puts pressure on liberalism.
We cross swords over the question of whether or not migrant women should be allowed to swim separately.
Such windmill battles distract from the real problems, such as the disadvantages of migrants in the labour market and in education, the isolation of some migrant women and the relatively high crime rate among boys from migrant families.
In the meantime, the integration is continuing, fortunately.
Entire sectors in our big cities, such as childcare and supermarkets, depend on the work of migrants and their descendants.
Thanks to a hundred thousand migrant youth in higher education, the Netherlands can become a knowledge country.
Without the newcomers, literature, pop music and sports would be much more boring.
Everyone has the right to be different.
There is no single definition of the good life.
Sometimes it seems that way.
When you see how many people work themselves to death.
When you hear people demanding that everyone adapt to the lifestyle that is typical of the Netherlands.
Their own, that is.
That's so un-Dutch.
Especially in times of crisis and fear, we must turn our differences into strength.
No one should be excluded.
That's a waste of talent.
A country that cherishes its liberalism acts like a magnet on creative minds from elsewhere.
It stands stronger in the world.
Liberal coexistence is not without obligation.
Sometimes it's quite a challenge to tolerate each other.
In order to be able to talk about what bothers us and what unites us, we must be able to understand each other.
That is why we expect newcomers to learn Dutch.
Otherwise they cannot participate in discussions and discussions in the neighbourhood, on the labour market or at their children's school.
That is why we ensure that immigrants know the most important values ​​from the Constitution, just as we teach them to children at school.
Integration is emancipation.
This calls for practical solutions to the disadvantages of some groups of newcomers.
GroenLinks opts for an activating participation state.
This offers people work instead of benefits.
This gives them more room to make independent choices.
The space for difference is limited by law.
You may not impose your will on another person, even if it concerns the partner you live with.
You may not discriminate against anyone, not even in a reformed school.
A liberal society exists by the grace of a reliable constitutional state that protects everyone's freedom.
The law cannot enforce tolerance.
This is an attitude that must be modelled, first and foremost, by people in prominent positions.
We may also expect the leaders of religious, ethnic and other communities – who are given space in our country thanks to liberalism – to set a good example.
They should not condemn other lifestyles, even if they conflict with their deepest beliefs.
Religion is meaningful and inspiring for many people.
Religious groups often make a valuable contribution to society.
But these communities should not prevent their members from turning their backs on the faith or from shaping it in their own way.
Serving a god should not be a peer pressure, a commandment from a husband or family.
Too many women are condemned to an isolated existence by orthodox beliefs or by the preference of some men for a dependent wife.
GroenLinks stands up for the right of these women to make their own choices: for example, marriage migrants not only integrate, but also follow an education, if they do not yet have sufficient diplomas for the Dutch labor market.
Economic independence reduces women's dependency, which too often leads to incarceration and domestic violence.
You should be able to choose the social connections in which you shape your life.
That is liberal citizenship in a constitutional state.
In a constitutional state, the law must be enforced without arbitrariness.
This is crucial for citizen confidence.
Both the scooter thief and the white-collar criminal deserve punishment.
This is not just about retaliation and deterrence.
Punishment should also be the beginning of work, education or treatment.
Otherwise we will breed revolving door criminals.
The GroenLinks government is not only concerned with repression, but also with prevention: care providers and the police are on top of things when they receive signals of parenting problems and violence within families.
A liberal society cannot exist without an open culture in which people can exchange and explore each other's views and lifestyles.
Many schools try to convey this open culture to children.
A vibrant arts sector and polyphonic media are also indispensable.
More people should be given the opportunity to learn to enjoy art.
Journalists deserve support to keep us well informed and to monitor the powers that be, whether through newspapers, broadcasters or websites.
The free printing press has been in the Netherlands since the seventeenth century.
Traditionally, we have been a refuge for people persecuted for their ideas or beliefs.
They made our country what it is today.
There are still people applying for asylum.
If they have a good reason for their flight, we should offer them a warm home.
They deserve the same opportunities, rights and obligations as other citizens of this country.
Our country must also stand up for refugees who knock on the door elsewhere.
A humane European asylum policy requires that we share the burdens and benefits fairly.
The Internet is the modern-day printing press.
It is the bane of dictators and the muse of inventors.
A modern democracy and a creative economy live on bytes and broadband.
But the web only vibrates if it remains free of gatekeepers and spies.
When everyone has access to the net.
And no one needs to fear that their mouse clicks will be snitched on.
The freedom of internet users is under pressure.
The planned download ban is not only a restriction of your freedom of information, but also an attack on your privacy.
If downloading is not allowed, every byte you download will have to be inspected from now on.
Then millions of Dutch people will be made suspects by a government that reaches far beyond their front doors.
In a constitutional state, not only the citizen but also the government has to adhere to limits.
It is not without reason that respect for personal privacy is included in our Constitution.
Many composers and musicians would love nothing more than for you to download their songs.
They use the opportunities offered by the Internet to be heard and seen, to gain fame and to create emotion.
GroenLinks does not want a download ban, but a charter of digital freedoms.
This should be high on the agenda in The Hague and Brussels.
A whole generation of whizz kids and pirates is asking for it.
The web must remain free.
Article 1 of the Constitution on equal treatment explicitly states that discrimination on the grounds of homosexual or heterosexual orientation, age and disability is also not permitted.
Municipalities do not grant subsidies or permits to public places if discrimination occurs there.
If necessary, they will close down.
The Labour Inspectorate will take stricter action against discrimination in the labour market.
A national action plan against discrimination is being developed, in which self-organisations will play a major role.
The Netherlands is working to have the EU's horizontal directive against discrimination outside the labour market approved.
The Equal Treatment Act is being tightened.
The 'single fact construction', which gives special education schools the right to expel openly homosexual teachers and students, is being abolished.
The Netherlands is committed to ensuring that same-sex marriages and registered partnerships are recognised in all EU countries.
Registrar officials may not refuse to marry same-sex partners.
All police forces will register violence against (alleged) gays, lesbians, bisexuals and transgenders.
Information campaigns draw attention to the possibility of anonymously reporting anti-gay violence.
10. Support for gay-straight alliances, such as in sports and the workplace, will continue.
11. Parenthood of gay couples is made as equal as possible to that of heterosexual couples and social acceptance is promoted.
12. The sterilization requirement for gender reassignment is abolished.
13. Integration is aimed at participation.
The quality is being improved.
Municipalities provide tailor-made solutions based on the capacities and ambitions of the participants.
The focus is on participation in society and on access to education and the labour market.
That is why learning the Dutch language is central.
Integration ensures that immigrants are aware of fundamental rights such as freedom of expression, the right to self-determination and non-discrimination.
From 2011 onwards, at least 80 percent of integration programmes will be offered through combined programmes, in which language acquisition is linked to work, education or participation.
Additional premiums remain available for this.
Migrants who have clearly integrated are exempted from integration programmes and integration exams.
14. The same income test will apply to marriage migrants from outside the EU as to EU citizens.
The age limit is 18 years.
There will be an integration requirement in the Netherlands instead of abroad, as well as a training programme: admitted partners, if they do not yet have a starting qualification for the labour market, will follow a tailor-made training course.
A form of student finance can be applied for to cover the training costs.
Early termination of the training has no consequences for the right of residence; However, an income-dependent portion of the study costs will then be borne by the partner of the marriage migrant if there are no extenuating circumstances.
In this way, the emancipation and integration of marriage migrants are promoted.
15. Admitted partners can obtain independent residence rights after one year, which become permanent after 2 years, or earlier in the event of physical or psychological violence, sexual abuse or death of the partner.
Failure to pass the integration exam may not prevent the granting of an independent residence permit, but will be prevented by fines.
16. The possibility of dual nationality is not restricted for born or naturalized Dutch citizens.
The Netherlands stands up for their right to renounce their original nationality.
17. The fees for naturalization and residence permits may not be higher than the actual administrative costs.
18. Crime prevention is paramount.
Problem families receive intensive help with parenting.
Fewer young people leave school without a diploma.
In consultation with youth care, education and the municipality, the deployment of the police will be more focused on tackling minor offences and preventing the formation of gangs.
19. Punishments are swift, transparent and fair.
In the case of a low sentence, alternative punishments are applied.
20. Prisoners have the right to their own cell.
21. Punishment becomes the beginning of work or education.
In preparation for their return to society, prisoners receive more guidance, treatment and training, also after their release, from the probation service and municipalities.
The cooperation of ex-prisoners is encouraged by the use of suspended sentences at the end of their prison sentences.
22. The execution of the life sentence is adjusted.
After 30 years, the judge will investigate whether release can be discussed in the long term.
Requests for clemency are no longer addressed to the King, but to the Supreme Court of the Netherlands.
23. The legal position of victims will be further strengthened.
In every criminal case, the government tries to repair the material and immaterial damage caused to victims and recover it from the perpetrators.
Victims who are heard by the examining magistrate can be assisted by a lawyer.
24. The police and Public Prosecution Service are obliged to keep victims who wish to be informed about the progress of their criminal case.
Victims are given the right to directly confront perpetrators with their suffering under supervision.
25. Migrants without a residence permit must be able to file a report safely, without their personal data being passed on to the Immigration Police.
26. The prevention and combating of domestic, sexual and honour-related violence will be intensified.
In the event of out-of-home placement, not only the perpetrator but also the victim receives legal assistance.
The police will have more capacity and expertise.
In addition to any punishment, perpetrators are more likely to be given therapy.
More care providers and professionals are being trained to recognize and report signs of abuse.
In the event of physical or psychological violence, partners with a dependent residence permit can immediately obtain an independent residence permit, so that they can escape the violent relationship more quickly.
The reception capacity is being expanded.
Municipalities ensure that there are sufficient shelters and transitional housing for female and male victims of domestic violence.
Extra attention will be paid to homosexuals and transgender people from traditional communities, for whom there is currently a great lack of shelter.
27. The government supports initiatives by sex workers to stand up for their interests and offers them opportunities to leave prostitution.
28. Control of the sex industry will be improved, without registration of sex workers.
Sex workers without a work permit and their clients will not be punished, to prevent abuses from no longer being reported.
29. The investigation and prosecution of human trafficking will be intensified, both in the sex industry and in other economic sectors.
30. Victims of human trafficking will be granted a residence permit if returning to their country of origin would be dangerous for them, even if they do not testify in criminal proceedings.
31. The quality of criminal justice will be significantly improved.
The examining magistrate will have a strong position in the investigation and prosecution, will ensure that the defense has access to information, just like the Public Prosecution Service, and will compile the criminal file that will be submitted to the judge.
32. The Netherlands will only cooperate in extending the mutual recognition of criminal decisions in the EU if there are insufficient joint safeguards for the rights of suspects.
33. Asylum policy guarantees the rights of asylum seekers, including a fair procedure, decent reception and – if an asylum application is rejected – safe return.
34. Within the EU, the Netherlands is committed to better compliance with the UN Refugee Convention and international human rights treaties, so that asylum seekers receive the same protection throughout Europe,
and for an amendment to the Dublin Regulation, which would ensure a fairer distribution of asylum applications across EU countries.
Responsibility for assessing asylum applications should not be shifted to countries outside the EU.
35. There will be a clear criterion for the application of the abbreviated asylum procedure; Clearly hopeless asylum applications may be dealt with more quickly.
In all other cases, due care takes precedence over speed within the procedure.
Asylum seekers are given the opportunity to introduce new facts and circumstances at every stage of their asylum procedure.
36. Vulnerable groups of asylum seekers, such as minors, women, sexual minorities and traumatised people, will receive special attention to ensure that their asylum claims are fully assessed.
37. Asylum seekers are assessed with current and accurate information about the country of origin.
This must be transparent and verifiable for the asylum seeker.
In addition to information from embassies, information from human rights organizations is also taken into account.
38. If no final decision has been made on an asylum application after 3 years, a residence permit will be granted.
39. Asylum seekers' centres will be small-scale, with sufficient privacy.
Attention is paid to the safety of vulnerable groups.
Asylum seekers are allowed to learn and work as long as they are in the Netherlands.
Asylum seekers with children in particular do not have to move all the time.
40. To promote the return of rejected asylum seekers, the Netherlands concludes return agreements with safe countries of origin, preferably within the EU.
41. If they do not oppose their deportation, rejected asylum seekers will continue to be accommodated until their return has actually been achieved.
42. Rejected asylum seekers may only be placed in immigration detention if it can be clearly demonstrated that they are obstructing return to their country of origin.
Detention of aliens for rejected asylum seekers may only be of a very limited duration; there must be a prospect of deportation.
The conditions in the closed shelter are safe and humane.
Under no circumstances will minors be placed in immigration detention.
43. Anyone who is unable to leave the Netherlands through no fault of their own will not be thrown out onto the street and will be given a temporary residence permit.
This can be converted into permanent residence status after 3 years if return is impossible for a long period of time.
44. Governments take responsibility for emergency shelter for asylum seekers who are in physical and/or psychological distress.
45. Medical care is available for foreigners who cannot obtain insurance.
46. ​​Additional financial support will be provided for arts and cultural education, youth theatre and amateur arts.
47. The government stimulates the development of the creative industry, including by providing guarantees for investments.
48. The transparency and independence of the arts councils that advise on arts subsidies will be increased.
49. The pillarized broadcasting system will disappear.
The public broadcaster will have 2 general television networks.
Network editors determine the programming.
Like newspaper editors, they are free in the choices they make.
Their autonomy is enshrined in law.
They can purchase the programs from broadcasting associations or external production houses.
50. Additional funding will be made available for Dutch documentaries and drama, as well as for the digitalisation of television.
51. The government plays an active role in stimulating journalistic productions,
without interfering with the content.
The incentive funds are not only for existing newspapers, but also and especially for the multitude of new media.
52. There will be more attention for media education in education.
Children learn to search for, filter and critically view information.
Libraries also have a role to play in this.
53. There will be no download ban.
Hyperlinking and embedding remains free.
54. The Netherlands will have a binding charter of digital fundamental rights and will also advocate this within the EU.
55. Copyright is in need of major modernisation, in terms of the duration and management of exploitation rights and the nature of use.
Fair compensation for the creator, the right of consumers to share information for non-commercial purposes and room for creative reuse are paramount.
Modernising copyright in the digital age requires shortening, in an international context, the terms of exploitation rights (which currently run until 70 years after the death of the creator) for future works.
The personal rights of creators, such as the right to be named and the right to object to violations of the integrity of their work, should continue to apply for life.
56. The position of independent authors and performing artists will be strengthened and the development of fair revenue models will be stimulated.
For example, by strengthening the negotiating position of individual artists and creators in relation to publishers, producers and collective management organisations or by introducing minimum standards for copyright contract law.
57. Article 7 of the Constitution on freedom of expression and Article 13 on the confidentiality of correspondence and telephone calls explicitly state that these rights also apply to comparable technologies such as the web and e-mail.
58. The Netherlands is reducing the retention period for traffic data from internet and telephone users to the European minimum of six months.
Within the EU, the government is committed to abolishing the data retention obligation.
59. The government guarantees net neutrality.
Governments and Internet service providers may not favor or block certain content, services or technological applications over others without the consent of users, unless ordered to do so by a court.
60. A law will be passed stating that no one may be disconnected from the Internet as part of a punishment or sanction.
61. The Netherlands advocates full transparency regarding the negotiations on the anti-counterfeiting treaty ACTA and opposes the inclusion of provisions on the internet and copyright.
62. The Netherlands takes a stand against censorship worldwide.
She is campaigning for a European ban on the export of software that can be used to censor and filter the Internet to countries where freedom of expression is not guaranteed.
63. The public sector uses open standards and, where possible, open source software.
The government also promotes its application outside the public sector.
64. The Netherlands opposes software patents and other forms of patent abuse.
65. Privacy and personal data are better protected.
Digital information systems, services and products are designed in such a way that only necessary information is stored, for a pre-defined purpose and anonymously where possible.
Citizens and consumers gain insight into the use of their personal data.
These may not be resold or shared with third parties without their explicit permission.
66. There will be a reporting obligation for data leaks.
67. The government is committed to making maximum efforts to minimize the consequences of identity theft for victims.
68. There will be no national database with the fingerprints of applicants for travel documents.
The government only stores fingerprints and facial scans of applicants for identity documents in the chip of that document, in accordance with the European regulation, so that it can be checked whether the passport and the person match.
69. Where possible, tasks of the General Intelligence and Security Service (AIVD) will be transferred to the police.
The number of telephone taps will be drastically reduced.
Judges are no longer allowed to use anonymous AIVD testimonies.
Artists organizing a street festival, neighbors creating a communal garden and families installing a mini windmill on their roof.
They deserve a government that gives them space instead of a government that erects a wall of rules and paperwork.
A government that helps them where necessary, but interferes as little as possible with people's personal privacy and does not deprive people of their own initiative.
At the same time, they may expect the government to take its public responsibility.
That it guarantees that every citizen has equal access to good healthcare, the best education and suitable housing.
These core government tasks have been outsourced on a large scale in recent years.
Parts of education, healthcare, housing, but also energy supply and public transport were left to uncontrollable independent administrative bodies, social institutions and private parties.
The gap between policy making and policy implementation grew ever wider.
Markets were liberalized, supervision outsourced or neglected.
Access to collective facilities and the quality of services have deteriorated as a result.
The excessive administrative burden leaves too little time for the actual work: providing services to citizens.
People who work for municipalities or in healthcare are judged too much on time recording and filling in forms.
Citizens, in turn, are confronted with a maddening indication industry and an abundance of procedures.
The government is not a business.
Not cold figures, but care, authority, service and effectiveness should be central to the public sector.
We need an active government that restores public control over tasks such as healthcare, education and housing.
But at the same time a government that is selective and gives people space to be active themselves.
This balance must be regained in the public sector.
The marketisation of large parts of the public sector has not resulted in a reduction in bureaucracy and administrative burden.
On the contrary, there is increasing regulatory and management pressure in education, healthcare and social security.
And little kingdoms have emerged: housing corporations and healthcare institutions that take irresponsible risks with public money.
It's time to give the public sector a good clean sweep.
This time not with the aim of divesting government tasks, but to form a leaner and more powerful government,
with sufficient democratic legitimacy.
Municipalities currently still work together in a tangle of regional associations: an average of 27 per municipality in 2005.
Due to the overlapping of tasks, an administrative circus has emerged that is no longer manageable for citizens
and has become completely uncontrollable for their representatives in councils and states.
GroenLinks opts for more leeway for municipalities and gives them the resources and powers to do so.
Whether it concerns helping people find work or shopping on Sundays, municipalities can provide tailor-made solutions.
Some of the policies that are currently still the responsibility of the provinces can be transferred to municipalities, such as culture and youth care.
This may mean that smaller municipalities will have to scale up in order to be able to properly carry out this more extensive range of tasks.
The provinces and water boards can be merged into a strong central government.
This will give it a major say in the spatial planning of the Netherlands.
To this end, some of the powers, tasks and budgets are shifting from the central government level to the middle level.
At the national level, the decompartmentalisation of ministries into eight departments contributes to a clear agenda for the future, with challenges that transcend classic policy areas.
In this way, administrative spaghetti is reduced at all levels.
This will make public administration stronger, at lower costs.
In addition to an active government, active citizens are also essential.
They should have more influence on how their lives are organised: in the neighbourhood, at school, in the hospital and at work.
This can be done through district budgets and client and residents' councils.
With a stronger position for elected representatives in works and participation councils.
By giving social organizations more room to maneuver and have a say.
But above all, by not nipping people's initiatives in the bud with bureaucratic nonsense, but by supporting them.
In this way we shape a democratic society in which people can participate, have their say and participate in decision-making.
1. Not cold figures, but care, authority, service and effectiveness will become leading in the public sector:
a) Public professionals are given more scope to respond to specific situations and questions from citizens.
b) Quality is the focus
and subsequently accounted for.
Citizens are involved in the accountability process.
A powerful and democratically legitimised central government is formed by merging the water boards and the provinces into a maximum of 7 regions.
The intermediate government is given extensive powers in the areas of spatial planning (including housing construction), traffic and transport, nature and water management and recreation, with environmental tasks and especially water management being the leading factors.
Some of the tasks of the current provinces, such as in the areas of youth care, welfare and culture, will be transferred to the municipalities.
The number of non-democratically legitimised regional organisations, such as WGR+ regions and city regions, will be severely reduced.
Tasks in the field of spatial planning will be transferred to the newly formed regions, while other tasks will be transferred to the municipalities.
The existing ministries will be merged into eight departments, with a limited number of management levels: a) General and Internal Affairs, including European Affairs; b) Justice and Immigration; c) Sustainability and Space; d) Finance and Economic Affairs; e) International Cooperation; f) Education, Culture and Youth; g) Work, Social Affairs and Emancipation; h) Care and Welfare.
The First Chamber is abolished.
A salary ceiling equal to the salary of the Prime Minister will apply throughout the (semi)public sector.
Ministerial salaries are being fixed and proposed increases are being reversed.
The hiring of expensive external consultants by governments is being reduced.
9. The number of independent administrative bodies will be reduced.
10. The Netherlands also strives for less administrative burden and more democracy in the European Union, by:
a) the merger of the Presidencies of the European Commission and the European Council into an EU President, elected by the European Parliament;
b) reducing the number of European Commissioners;
c) cross-border electoral lists for the European Parliament, with lead candidates competing for the EU presidency;
d) Europe-wide corrective referendums.
1. The say of citizens in healthcare and educational institutions and housing associations will be strengthened, for example by expanding the powers and rights of client and residents' councils.
Extra attention should be paid to vulnerable groups such as homeless youth and addicts.
12. Governments actively invite citizens to participate in policy-making, for example through citizen panels and district budgets.
Citizens are also more directly involved in the evaluation of policy, for example through user groups and quality panels.
13. There will be a Freedom of Information Act.
This establishes the right of free access to public sector information, as well as an obligation of prompt disclosure.
The number of grounds for exception is limited.
14. Citizens will have the right to have laws tested against the Constitution by a judge.
15. The future College for Human Rights and Equal Treatment will be independent and well equipped to promote compliance with both civil and socio-economic human rights in the Netherlands.
16. Online collaboration offers citizens new opportunities for political participation.
The government will experiment with forms of e-participation and support existing initiatives in this area, in order to involve groups that currently participate little.
17. The separation of functions between executive and supervisory powers is strengthened (a stronger dualism) at local, provincial and national level.
The mayor and the Queen's Commissioner are no longer chairmen of the municipal council and the Provincial Council respectively.
18. The municipal council elects the mayor.
The Provincial States elect the Queen's Commissioner.
19. The House of Representatives elects the formateur and the Prime Minister.
In time, the Netherlands will become a republic and the head of state will also be elected.
As long as the current head of state is part of the government, information about which organisations the royal house has a financial interest in should be publicly available.
20. Citizen involvement in politics is low and political parties are facing a crisis of legitimacy.
In light of these developments, GroenLinks calls for a broad social debate on the renewal of our democracy.
The credit crisis has caused significant damage to our economy.
This has also thrown government finances out of whack.
There will be less tax revenue and the additional demand for unemployment benefits will have to be paid.
Without intervention, the government will be short of money in the coming years.
GroenLinks believes that these shortages should be eliminated as quickly as is economically justifiable.
This requires a balanced approach.
It's not just government debt that matters.
We also have to take into account the damage that has already been done to the environment and needs to be repaired.
If we don't do this, we will saddle future generations with a sky-high debt.
And with a society that lacks energy, clean water, fair food and other resources.
We need to get rid of the credit card culture that encourages companies and citizens to take on debt and postpones its repayment.
GroenLinks' principles for a sound and supportive financial policy are as follows:
Nothing is economically sensible if it is ecologically unwise.
GroenLinks invests in the rapid greening of the economy and society.
The strongest shoulders bear the heaviest burdens.
GroenLinks is in solidarity with people in vulnerable positions
and strengthens solidarity between generations.
Cuts are only made where possible and responsible, and investments are made where necessary.
Reforming the left and green is the best way to cut costs.
The reforms that GroenLinks proposes, for example in the labour market and the tax system, not only generate money for the state treasury, but also have other positive effects, such as more equal employment opportunities and a better environment.
Taxes on pollution and wealth are increased and taxes on labor are reduced.
Because green works.
If the government runs out of money, both cutbacks and tax increases are in order.
International agreements are complied with, such as the European Stability Pact and the agreements on development cooperation.
The government will not only be short of money in the coming years.
In the long term, our society will age.
That sounds gloomy, but it is unfair.
Growing old in good health and prosperity; that's called progress.
It is wise to prepare ourselves well for this future with relatively more elderly people and fewer young people.
GroenLinks uses two principles in this regard:
We will also need people in the classroom and at the bedside in the future.
Shortages of well-trained personnel must be prevented.
We all have an interest in that.
That is why it is good that more people in the Netherlands will start paid work in the long term.
Labor participation must increase.
We face the future in solidarity.
Young people already pay relatively high amounts for facilities (such as healthcare and state pension) that are mainly or exclusively used by older people.
That would be right if many elderly people, as in the past, have little or no means of subsistence.
That is no longer the case.
Older generations have more and more income and wealth.
That is why GroenLinks wants to distribute the burden more fairly across generations and reduce the current unequal distribution.
It will take some time before the aging process reaches its peak.
However, it is wise to make decisions now about, for example, the structure and financing of the AOW and pensions, the deduction of mortgage interest, solidarity financing of the AWBZ (the insurance for long-term care) and the financing of higher education.
If we do this now, there will be time for everyone to prepare for the changes that are coming.
If we do not do this or do this too late, young people will end up paying the bill and we will jeopardize solidarity between generations.
We can and must now choose a perspective on a solid future,
with a view to sustainable government finances.
Tomorrow's generations may demand that we take action now.
The starting point of a healthy financial and economic policy is Gross National Happiness.
Reducing the national debt is important, but not sacrosanct.
GroenLinks is now investing in a clean and green future.
A sensible budgetary policy is being pursued.
The economy is not cut to pieces when things are going badly, and is not unnecessarily or extra stimulated when things are going well.
The budget deficits will be eliminated as quickly as is responsible.
In the long term, the aim is to achieve a structural budget surplus.
The tax system is being greened
and increased the tax on wealth.
The proceeds will be used to reduce the government deficit and the burden on labour.
The purchasing power of workers up to the average income, as well as families with children on minimum income, will increase as a priority.
Members of the Royal Family, like everyone else, pay taxes on income and wealth.
There will be a top rate of 60 percent for incomes above 150,000 euros.
When cutting government spending, expenditure on education, healthcare, public transport and development cooperation in particular is spared.
As much additional investment as possible is being made in these sectors.
Education is a top priority.
Creating debt is no longer encouraged, but paying it off is.
This will put an end to the preference for debt over equity in corporate tax.
Solidarity between young and old, healthy and sick, and rich and poor, is strengthened.
This is achieved through, among other things: a) adjustment of healthcare financing; b) revision of the tax system; c) modernisation of the labour market; d) modernization of the housing market; e) introduction of a new system for financing higher education; f) fair financing of old age provisions.
These measures are being taken quickly and effectively to ensure the government budget is secured in the long term
and there is time for proper introduction and habituation.
