A better Poland for everyone
30 years after the fall of communism in Poland, we find ourselves as a civic community at a turning point.
Just like in 1989, the elections will once again decide the direction Poland will take in the coming years, and perhaps even decades.
We will decide what the political system of our country will be, the nature of social relations, the scope of real civil rights and freedoms, we will outline the prospects for our economy and Poland's place in Europe.
We will choose the future of Poles.
Will every vote have equal strength?
Will anyone be able to pursue a career in Poland, or only members and supporters of the ruling party?
Will everyone be equal in school, court, hospital, bank or office, or will those associated with power prove to be more equal?
Will Poland be a country to be reckoned with in the region, Europe and the world, and will we all be proud of it, or will we be left for a long time to assume the role of outsiders railing against the rest of the world for our isolation?
These are just some of the choices Polish people face today.
This key moment for the fate of the country requires both great prudence and great courage.
We have established a broad Civic Coalition as an agreement of people who understand the significance of the challenges that Poland and Poles face in the present times.
The Civic Coalition unites people from the centre, the moderate right and the left, who share a goal that seems to be the most important one for the majority of Poles today: a democratic Poland,
honest,
safe
and firmly rooted in Europe.
We decided to offer voters nearly a thousand diverse candidates who guarantee honesty, patriotism, energy and commitment.
These are people experienced in work and social activity at the national, regional, local and environmental levels.
After weeks of public discussions and meetings, we present our election program.
We base the Civic Coalition's program on the belief that money from the state budget is not the property of any party.
They cannot therefore be used – as is currently happening in the pathological state – for political corruption, vote-buying, enfranchising party activists and propaganda masking of scandals in which the authorities are entangled.
The first and fundamental point of our program is to build democracy for all citizens,
and not – as today – party democracy.
We owe the state budget to tax revenues paid thanks to the hard work of Polish people – people with different views and political sympathies.
That is why we want public money to be allocated only to state activities based on the logic of the common good.
The Civic Coalition's program focuses on key tasks of the state.
One of them is helping the weakest and most needy.
We have prepared a precise plan to repair the state of the health service.
We also have detailed proposals to protect women and children experiencing violence.
We also propose an ambitious programme aimed at seniors – people who deserve effective assistance from the Polish state because they have worked for their country all their lives.
We believe that the duty of a strong and just Republic is to build an order that motivates people to learn and work.
and encouraging people to take business risks associated with running a company and employing employees.
Instead of feeding Poles the illusion that the source of prosperity for Polish families can only be social assistance, without income from one's own work, the Civic Coalition proposes solutions that will actually increase the salaries of millions of hard-working but still underpaid Poles.
Our proposals will keep women and older people in the labour market – not by force, but on a voluntary basis thanks to guarantees of higher wages and a decent pension.
We also propose solutions that reward honest Polish entrepreneurs, ensuring the stability and transparency of the legal system in which they operate.
For us, entrepreneurs are not thieves against whom today's state deploys all the services at its disposal.
Polish entrepreneurs and Polish workers are the actual creators of the strength and wealth of our country.
The economic program of the Civic Coalition does them justice.
All the solutions we propose contain guarantees that state aid, i.e. money from taxes earned by all citizens, will actually reach those most in need.
The ad hoc and predatory strategy of creating a state, implemented over the last four years, clearly shows the attitude of the ruling party towards the natural environment, which is our common good.
Forests are being cut down, water quality is not being taken care of, Polish cities are plagued by the worst smog in Europe.
In the programme we show how to change this – so that our children and grandchildren can also enjoy Polish nature.
The Civic Coalition also proposes an ambitious educational package dedicated to Polish children and parents, to whom the current government has imposed total chaos at school.
Solutions that will rebuild Polish schools,
raise the profile of the teaching profession,
and Polish children – those from the metropolis and those from the provinces – will be guaranteed equal opportunities in their start in life.
Poles, despite many difficult experiences, are proud of their achievements since 1989.
Today, however, they want a better Poland – not only for themselves, but for all their compatriots and future generations.
In the Civic Coalition we know that there is no freedom, equality and solidarity without a well-organized, honest state,
in which the efficient functioning of institutions is appreciated,
army strength
and effective foreign policy.
A country where the norms are clear and the same for everyone, and the media and culture unite – not incite.
Today's state creates a privileged caste of people of the ruling party and drains society in order to maintain its power.
Our plan, on the contrary, gives us the chance to build a state that is good for all,
a country that thinks ahead – for the coming decades.
We propose building a country in which our children and grandchildren will want to live and start families.
We present to you the electoral program of the Civic Coalition "Your Poland".
POLISH DEMOCRACY FREEDOM AND DEMOCRACY FOR ALL
RULE OF LAW
The Republic of Poland is a democratic state governed by the rule of law.
The Constitution of the Republic of Poland establishes the principle of the separation of powers and defines the basic rights and obligations of citizens.
Their violations over the last four years and the obvious violations of the Constitution mean that it is necessary to clarify the constitutional and legal responsibility of persons currently holding the highest offices in the state.
We believe that the disastrous legacy of the past four years in Poland is a consequence of the authorities' repeated violations of the principles of democracy, law, including the Constitution, and the construction of a party state.
We will change it.
We will ensure that the voice of citizens is heard
– we will introduce online voting
and the principle that a million collected signatures will oblige a referendum to be held.
We will restore the constitutional principle that everyone in Poland is equal, deserves respect, opportunities for development, necessary protection and – when necessary – care.
Everyone, because we are all equal citizens of one homeland regardless of political views, religious activity, place of residence and level of wealth.
The Polish state will better support people with disabilities.
We will legalize civil partnerships.
We will restore the efficiency and independence of the courts
and complete freedom for the media, including public media.
We will pass the Democracy Renewal Act, which will not only be a set of legal provisions abolishing all violations of the principles of a democratic state in the laws and decisions of the last four years,
but will also introduce mechanisms strengthening the democratic system of government and the separation of powers adopted after 1989.
We will rebuild the independence and autonomy of the Polish judiciary, starting with the Constitutional Tribunal.
We will restore the principles of electing judges to the National Council of the Judiciary, as set out in the Constitution of the Republic of Poland.
and the original structure of the Supreme Court.
We will implement changes that will speed up the resolution of citizens' cases in common courts
and we will prevent any influence of politicians on the decisions made there.
We will separate the functions of the Prosecutor General from the Minister of Justice.
We will introduce clear criteria for promotions, competitions and term limits for positions in the prosecutor's office.
We will repair what has been severely damaged in recent years: the Polish army,
diplomacy, image and position of the Republic of Poland in the world.
DEMOCRACY BEYOND PARTY INTERESTS
Democracy Renewal Act
Independence of the Constitutional Tribunal,
depoliticization and reform of the National Council of the Judiciary
Legislative Code: high quality law
Democracy is supposed to serve Poles and cannot be subordinated to party interests, because as we have seen, this leads to the destruction of the constitutional order and becomes a threat to the rights and freedoms of citizens.
That is why we will adopt the Democracy Renewal Act, which will create a lasting framework for a democratic rule of law.
Its foundations will be independent institutions, guarantees of fundamental civil rights and freedoms.
and impartial and credible mechanisms for controlling power.
We will rebuild the position and independence of the Constitutional Tribunal,
we will remove the double-judges from it.
We will de-partisanize the National Council of the Judiciary
and we will take away from politicians the right to choose the judges sitting on it.
We will ensure the independence of the Supreme Court.
The Democracy Renewal Act will guarantee Poles their fundamental rights and freedoms, which are currently being increasingly restricted, including full freedom of assembly and the right to privacy.
We will also introduce new solutions that will strengthen the quality of democracy and rebuild Poles' trust in the state and its institutions.
The constitutional function of the Sejm and Senate in terms of lawmaking will be restored,
democratic control and intelligent, substantive debate serving Poland and Poles.
We will adopt a Legislative Code that will define transparent and reliable principles of law-making in Poland.
We will guarantee a space for public dialogue with Polish women and men on issues that are fundamental to Poland.
Greater involvement of non-governmental organizations in the country's affairs
and effective social control will be an additional safeguard for the stability of the rule of law and democratic institutions.
Violating the Constitution of the Republic of Poland is a crime against the state.
We will introduce accountability for all those who violated the standards of the rule of law.
GOOD LAW, FREE COURTS
An independent, apolitical and professional justice system
Speeding up pending cases and reducing fees
Prosecutor's Office Decisions Independent of Politics: Separation of Functions
Prosecutor General and Minister of Justice
The effect of the changes introduced in the justice system over the last four years is not only the destruction of the constitutional order, independent institutions and the rule of law,
but also a deterioration in the quality of the justice system, in particular the increase in the average waiting time for trials.
Polish courts cannot be a place where a politician puts pressure on a citizen.
The courts must be independent, professional and efficient.
In order to strengthen the independence of courts and eliminate pressure on judges who are rebellious towards the authorities, we will eliminate the abuse of the institution of "delegation of judges" and discretionary bonuses.
We will introduce a transparent system for nominating new judges of common courts.
We will transfer administrative supervision of the common courts to the Supreme Court.
We will introduce well-thought-out solutions that will speed up court proceedings and facilitate access to courts for all Poles.
We will increase the role of electronic systems in servicing courts,
we will improve court administration.
We will popularize arbitration systems and mediation
and we will transfer some judicial powers to other state institutions, e.g. registry offices or notaries.
We will simplify and reduce court fees.
We will introduce a well-thought-out and well-planned reform of the prosecutor's office.
We will finally separate the functions of the Prosecutor General and the Minister of Justice.
We will make sure that the superior of the prosecutors' corps cannot be a member of parliament or the president of a political party, but only an experienced prosecutor.
We will introduce competitions and clear criteria for promotions and term of office.
FREE MEDIA
Depoliticization of public media
Subscription cancellation
and limit advertising
Public regional media returned to the regions
Freedom is the most important constitutional right of every human being, the foundation of democracy and the rule of law.
Freedom is, among other things, freedom of speech and the right to reliable and credible information.
Public media cannot be – as they have been for the last four years – limited to propaganda functions for the ruling party.
Therefore, ensuring free and independent media and reliable journalism is one of the most important tasks of the Civic Coalition.
We will implement the healing of public media based on three fundamental principles resulting from the “Media Pact” signed by the democratic opposition in 2016.
The media will be: civic,
politically independent
and financially stable.
We will restore the constitutional powers of the National Broadcasting Council
and we will liquidate the National Media Council.
We will also restore the rotation of the terms of office of the KRRiTV members, differentiating the terms into 6, 4 and 2 years.
Public media must fulfil their civic mission: reliable, impartial and credible.
That's why we will limit the broadcast of advertisements
and at the same time we will cancel the subscription.
We believe that regional Poland is as important as central Poland.
Therefore, control over regional public media centres will be exercised by provincial governments.
And their program will be largely devoted to local issues closest to the citizens.
THE RIGHT OF POLES TO DECIDE
A million signatures guarantee a referendum
Full transparency of state decisions
Reliable public consultations
Democracy cannot be rationed and limited to the moment of elections.
That is why we will introduce obligatory referenda in Poland if we collect one million signatures.
We want the dialogue between Poles and the government to be continuous and for citizens to continue to have an influence on those in power.
We will restore access to public data,
We will introduce transparency of personnel and financial decisions of the state administration.
This will allow Polish people to make decisions based on reliable knowledge.
Dialogue with citizens at every level will be the basis for all decisions concerning Poland's development.
We will ensure real participation in it by civic and social movements.
and organizations that care for human and civil rights.
We will entrust civil society organizations with the implementation of important tasks and projects.
We will restore the function of public consultation in lawmaking.
POLISH WOMEN'S RIGHTS
Peaceful motherhood e
and a good job that can be combined with time for family and yourself
The right to in vitro and perinatal care
Equal pay for women and men
The right of every Polish woman is a peaceful motherhood,
decent salary
and absolute protection against violence.
Women living in the harshest conditions, abused by domestic abusers, require special legal and material protection from the state.
We will change the Penal Code so that the perpetrator fears punishment and punishment is inevitable.
Responsibility for the good future of every child is not only the responsibility of the parents, but also of the state.
Every child has the right to material security, a decent life and education,
that is why we will change the law to effectively support single mothers in their fight for due maintenance benefits.
We do not consent to women being hostages to anyone's worldview.
We will guarantee women access to free in vitro procedures
and a real right to free anesthesia during childbirth, not just written “on paper”.
Exactly the same principle of maximum care for women applies to full access to prenatal testing and perinatal care.
We will introduce sex education in schools
and available and subsidized contraception.
We will bring back over-the-counter emergency contraception.
We will implement solutions that will provide women with the opportunity for personal and professional development.
We will end the frequent discrimination against women in the labor market.
Every woman for the same work and the same qualifications must be guaranteed the same opportunities for professional development as a man.
Therefore, we will equalize the pay of women and men with the same qualifications and working in the same positions.
We will also introduce a gender balance mechanism in managerial and executive positions in state institutions and State Treasury companies.
In Poland, employee assessments and rewards will become standard, depending on their actual competences and work contribution, not gender.
By combating stereotypes, making wages transparent, eliminating barriers to promotion and supporting women in the labour market, including in high-paid sectors, we will eliminate the pay and pension gap between women and men.
We also firmly oppose placing women facing the most difficult alternative: family or work.
We will increase (just like in cities where politicians from the Civic Coalition govern) the number of places in nurseries and kindergartens,
and we will also introduce two-month paternity leave.
VOTING OVER THE INTERNET
Greater involvement of Poles in state affairs
Independence of voting
Increased turnout
and counteracting exclusion
Democratic processes, including participation in elections and referenda, must take into account the development of information and communication technologies that have applications in our everyday lives.
Internet voting will create conditions for increased turnout, especially among young people.
It will be made even easier for groups at risk of exclusion, including people with disabilities, to participate in elections.
The Polish state will be modern –
and above all, friendly to citizens.
PUNISHMENT FOR VIOLENCE
Protection of victims of violence
Full enforcement of the law
Harsh penalties for violence
Unpunished violence, especially against women, is one of the worst elements of the poorly functioning state today.
The current Parliament came close to passing a law that protects perpetrators of domestic violence and intimidates its victims, discouraging them from asserting their inalienable rights.
That is why we will introduce an anti-violence policy that will guarantee the full enforceability of the law while ensuring effective protection for victims.
This will apply not only to domestic violence, but also to sexual crimes and all other manifestations of violence, including violence on the Internet or in public life.
Defining who is the victim and who is the aggressor cannot be related to anyone's political views.
The pursuit of the inevitability of punishment is not subject to discussion here – for example, it is the perpetrator, not the victim, who should be forced to leave the shared accommodation.
REAL ALIMONY
The state is on the side of the children
Alimony as inevitable as taxes
Courts cooperating with other institutions
A child has two parents responsible for its upbringing and maintenance.
Alimony is not a gift, but an inalienable right.
The person entitled to collect them should not be forced to collect them themselves – they must receive them in their account on time.
Therefore, alimony payments will be collected just like overdue taxes.
The state is now focused on collecting money from citizens, we will ensure that it starts doing this effectively for them as well.
We will improve the functioning of courts and all institutions implementing their decisions in this regard.
FAMILY AND WORK
Relief for working family members
Supporting shared responsibility for the family
Paid two-month paternity leave
Both family and work are fundamental values ​​in our society.
That is why we will provide Polish women and men with the instruments and financial resources necessary to reconcile family life with work: nurseries, kindergartens,
care homes for seniors, including day care homes,
educational clubs
and flexible time and work organization.
We will support a partnership-based family model and a fair division of roles in childcare,
promoting paternity leave and guaranteeing two months of paid parental leave specifically for fathers.
We want the family to have full right to decide about their activities.
VALUED COMPETENCES
The end of gender criteria in remuneration
Helping women in their careers
Fighting bad stereotypes
We will equalize the pay of women and men with the same qualifications and working in the same positions.
By combating stereotypes, being transparent in setting wages, eliminating barriers to promotions and supporting women in the labour market, including in high-paid sectors, we will eliminate the pay and pension gap between women and men.
We will introduce a gender balance mechanism in the management of state institutions and State Treasury companies.
In Poland, employee assessments and rewards based on their actual competences, not gender, will become the standard.
LEGAL PARTNERSHIPS
Legal sanctioning of a permanent relationship between close persons
The right to inheritance and medical information
A state that protects against discrimination
Even though the current government does not want to acknowledge it, civil partnerships are a fact in Poland.
These are relationships between very close people, both heterosexual and homosexual, who for various reasons do not enter into marriage.
But neither gender nor other factors, especially prejudices on the part of representatives of the authorities, can deprive the partners of such a relationship of the possibility of having legal ties: inheritance, obtaining medical information about a loved one, the right to a burial.
No one, especially state representatives, can be bothered by the fact that people want to take care of each other and create a lasting relationship between two people who are closest to each other.
DISABILITY SUPPORT
Elimination of the pension trap
The same benefits for carers of children and adults
Free rehabilitation sessions and free medicines
A world without barriers for people with disabilities must begin with the removal of legal barriers.
That is why the Civic Coalition will abolish the so-called pension trap.
Currently, the pension is partially suspended once the pensioner earns more than 70% of the national average salary, and the entire pension is suspended above 130% of the national average.
Lifting the restrictions will allow pensioners to retain their full pension amount and will increase the motivation to seek permanent employment for pensioners who can earn extra money.
This will significantly improve the financial situation of people with disabilities.
At the same time, the Civic Coalition will implement the 2014 judgment of the Constitutional Tribunal stating that caregivers of adults with disabilities should receive benefits no less than caregivers of children with disabilities, because their situation and challenges are identical.
A clear system will be created for state support of non-governmental activation programmes and projects supporting people with disabilities.
The state will help disabled Poles leave their four walls – an easy-to-use information system will be created about possible financial and material assistance.
We also want to introduce free rehabilitation sessions for people with disabilities at least once a year and access to a package of free medications.
OFFICES FOR PEOPLE
A citizen is not a petitioner
Uniform standard of public services
Taxes will not be wasted
In direct contacts, the state administration must take care of the citizen.
Therefore, the Civic Coalition will introduce an act on the standardization of public services provided by central and local government administration.
We will build a professional, well-rewarded and apolitical civil service corps.
It will operate on the basis of a uniform civil service act and a uniform standard of public services.
Citizens will clearly feel that their taxes are being spent for their benefit and that the official is there to help them.
REAL LOCAL GOVERNMENT
PIT and CIT for local governments
Liquidation of provincial offices in favor of local government
Strengthening the budgets of citizens, villages and residents' councils
Local government is not a competition for the state, but the most important representation of the will of Polish people.
That is why we will abolish provincial offices, which are currently annexes of the ruling party.
We will transfer their competences to the provincial governments.
The voivodeship marshal will be the sole host of the region.
We will also decentralize state finances; PIT and CIT taxes will remain in their entirety in local governments, because they know best how the money from citizens' taxes should be spent.
The Special Solidarity Fund will guarantee financial security to local governments with lower income opportunities.
We need to give Polish women and men as much power as possible at every level,
therefore, without weakening local governments, we will transfer some of the tasks to village councils, housing estate councils and non-governmental organizations.
This will strengthen the subjectivity and activity of residents.
We will also strengthen the role of participatory budgets, legislative initiatives and municipal referenda on matters most important to local communities.
The creation of metropolises should also be profitable for Polish men and women.
We will introduce legal and financial mechanisms enabling the creation of metropolitan associations while respecting the decisions and sovereignty of all interested parties.
We will not introduce changes to the administrative boundaries of the municipalities or alter the relations between the city and its surroundings.
FREE NETWORK
Freedom measured in gigabytes
Free internet for young people
365 gigabytes per year
The #FreeNetwork program will cover over 5 million young citizens aged 11 to 24.
In the 21st century, the Internet has become an inseparable element of our everyday life, but also the basis for the development of civilization.
Only a society with access to a broadband network can effectively compete and conquer the world.
In the years 2007–2015, Poland managed to significantly develop its broadband Internet network.
Today, the Internet reaches over 80% of households in Poland.
It is time for another civilizational leap in this area.
Today, freedom is measured in gigabytes, which is why we offer FREE Internet to every pupil, student, and young working people up to 24 years of age.
1 gigabyte per day.
365 gigabytes a year.
This means constant access to the network.
Thanks to this, every young person will be able to spend hours listening, reading, watching, recording, programming and learning online.
We advocate for more effective use of the achievements of digitalization not only for convenience and economic benefits, but also for the safety of citizens.
We will computerize police procedures and introduce the possibility of electronically reporting crimes.
This will enable people to report cases without having to wait for hours at a police station.
The proposed changes are particularly important in the context of the increase in the number of cybercrimes, which affect an increasing part of society (e.g. identity theft, fraud, account hacking).
Within the police we will expand the service responsible for combating cybercrime.
We will also implement a special program to protect children on the Internet.
YOUNG POLAND
Until the age of 25, no ZUS or NFZ contributions
Business start-up grants
Your own company instead of the Employment Office
The Civic Coalition will make it easier for young people aged 15 and over to run a small business.
As part of the “Six-Pack for the Economy” package, we propose to exempt all young entrepreneurs from paying ZUS and NFZ contributions until they reach the age of 25.
Today, you can only receive funding for starting a business if you are unemployed.
Active young people are therefore in a worse situation than unemployed people; some of them fictitiously register with employment offices just to be able to receive funding.
The Civic Coalition will implement a special start-up grant program for young people who want to start their own businesses, aimed especially at start-ups.
Grants will be available quickly and without unnecessary procedures.
ORLIK 2.0
New program Orliki 2.0
Expansion of sports complexes
Investing in the careers of future champions
We want to provide young people with space and equipment for active recreation and sports activities.
That is why we are planning the Orliki 2.0 program.
The Orlik construction program provided access to playing fields for millions of young people throughout Poland.
The Civic Coalition will invest further funds in the development of sports fields and complexes.
Sports instructors must return to the Orlik fields, and the program will be expanded to include the construction of multi-purpose fields.
We will invest in sports championship schools and training facilities.
Annual grants will be awarded to local sports clubs.
Young Polish athletes must have high-standard facilities to be able to improve their skills.
CRISIS SUPPORT
Stop depression and
escalation of violence
Stop the rising number of suicides
Telephone and online support
We will ensure the development and increase in the number of Crisis Intervention Centers.
They will counteract loneliness and depression,
escalation of aggression and violence
and the increasing number of suicides among young people.
We will expand the possibilities of providing telephone support to young people in difficult situations.
We also want to promote online support channels – contact with psychologists and advisors via instant messaging and text messages.
DIGNITY OF A SOLDIER
Promotion as a result of skills
Strengthening operational forces
Pensions and housing rights remain unchanged
We will rebuild the strong position of the officer and soldier of the professional army.
Military service must be based on the principles of transparency and stability, and promotion must result from skills, not political influence.
We will restore the priority of personnel and equipment for the professional army,
and Territorial Defense units will be included in the operational forces as an element of the reserve system.
Existing rules regarding pensions, severance pay and the provision of housing to soldiers will remain unaffected.
The army deserves respect and recognition.
MODERN ARMY
Anti-missile and anti-aircraft defense
Development of IT systems
Greater troop mobility
The four-year backlog in the modernization of the Polish Army will be made up for.
We will restore the priority of anti-missile and anti-aircraft defense,
ensuring troop mobility
and the development of IT systems.
The deployment and equipping of military units will be organised in such a way as to increase Poland’s defence capabilities and not to achieve immediate propaganda goals.
THE ARMY THAT WORKS
We will recreate the capabilities of Polish divisions
We will rebuild the navy
We will restore care for veterans
We will restore the division command in Elbląg, which was liquidated by the current government.
We will restore previous abilities to the remaining divisions.
The new 18th Mechanized Division in Siedlce will receive a real program for obtaining personnel and equipment.
We will present a Navy reconstruction program that will ensure the protection of Poland's interests in the Baltic Sea.
We will increase state care for veterans in accordance with the Act on the Military Service of Professional Soldiers adopted in 2011 and based on the Veterans’ Centre operating since 2014.
STRONG DEFENSE INDUSTRY
Polish defense industry powered by the army
Offset as a condition for foreign contracts
Our industry supported by the European Defence Fund
We treat the Polish defence industry as one of the pillars of the country's military capabilities.
Orders for the Polish Army must guarantee its development based on modern technologies.
Foreign contracts, so-called offset or other forms of cooperation, will be implemented with significant participation of the Polish defence industry in leading and innovative projects.
The Polish defence industry, both state and private, will be involved in joint projects of the European Defence Fund.
MORE NATO
Anti-missile base in Redzikowo
Poland's stronger position in the region
Our role in NATO corresponds to our role in the EU
In addition to Poland's own defence capabilities, NATO membership is of key importance for Poland's security.
The Civic Coalition supports the strengthening and expansion of the presence of US and NATO troops on Polish territory.
We attach particular importance to completing the cooperation undertaken by the PO-PSL government in the construction of the US and NATO anti-missile base in Redzikowo, the construction of the host nation infrastructure and warehouses for heavy equipment of allies.
In the political dimension, allied cooperation must strengthen Poland's regional role.
Of particular importance here are agreements such as the Weimar Triangle, the Visegrad Group and the Bucharest Format.
We will support any form of cooperation within the EU that, in coherence with NATO, will develop the defence capabilities of member states.
This applies in particular to EU military missions, European Defence Fund projects and the European Defence Agency.
INTERNAL SECURITY
Full right to safe assembly
Zero tolerance for hate speech
Police on guard of security
The right to assembly, the right to express one's beliefs, the right to safety are the inalienable rights of every Polish woman and man.
We will ensure the safety of participants in public gatherings and sporting events.
The tolerance for aggressive behavior, violence and hate speech will end, including on the Internet.
A depoliticized prosecutor's office will effectively prosecute perpetrators of hate crimes and people disrupting mass events.
We oppose blaming local governments for demonstrations and mass events.
The police will be responsible for the protection and safety of peacefully demonstrating citizens.
PRIVACY PROTECTED
Repealing laws that violate privacy
Protection of journalistic secrets
Protection of secrecy in public trust professions
We will protect the privacy and secrecy of citizens' correspondence.
Those provisions of the “surveillance” and “anti-terrorism” laws that may violate human rights and civil liberties will be repealed.
They were adopted contrary to the judgment of the Constitutional Tribunal.
We will restore the law guaranteeing effective protection of journalistic secrets and we will prevent unjustified interference by special services in the work of journalists.
Similarly, the rights to protect professional secrecy of other professions of public trust will be restored.
PROFESSIONAL POLICE
Term of office of positions
Freedom from political pressure
Promotion and training availability
We will restore the apolitical nature of the police.
We will introduce term limits for managerial positions in the Police, State Fire Service, Border Guard and State Protection Service.
This will ensure that command staff can serve free from political pressure.
We will reform the police promotion and training system.
Police officers who risk their lives in service to citizens must be satisfied with their job.
INFLUENCE ON THE POLICE
Crime Map as Public Standard
Professional lost and found database
Certainty that the purchase is not stolen
We will ensure transparency of police work by publishing a map of crimes and offenses and providing a database of lost items.
Each of us has the right to know what the actual level of safety is, for example where we live, work or on the route our children walk to school.
Making this information public will enable the police to be held accountable for the tasks they perform and will make it easier for local governments to cooperate to improve safety.
The map will also help public institutions coordinate activities aimed at ensuring safety.
By making the database of lost items public, citizens will be sure that the items they purchase are not stolen.
This will improve the effectiveness of recovering stolen goods.
SPECIAL SERVICES UNDER SUPERVISION
A reliable audit of the secret services
Liquidation of the ineffective CBA
Police as a whip against corruption
The heads of the services will be appointed based on criteria of experience, qualifications and party independence.
We will conduct an audit of personnel and organizational procedures enabling the appointment of only experienced service officers to senior management positions.
We will strengthen civilian and parliamentary control over the secret services.
The pathologies of the last four years of the services' operation will be curtailed and punished.
We will liquidate the Central Anticorruption Bureau, which is not very involved in fighting bribery, but is mostly involved in settling party and private scores.
The main role in the fight against corruption will be taken over by the reinforced police, which conducts several times more anti-corruption proceedings than the CBA.
MODERN GUARD
Volunteer Fire Department with Civil Defense tasks
A decisive modernization
Greater competence
The Volunteer Fire Department plays a huge role in ensuring safety and assistance to citizens in crisis situations.
That is why we will create a program of financial support for the modernization and retrofitting of Volunteer Fire Department headquarters.
We want to make them local centres of activity for young people.
The program will include, among others: modernization of buildings or purchase of equipment supporting the development of physical activity.
We will prepare the Volunteer Fire Department to perform Civil Defense tasks within the commune.
We will transfer the powers of the Civil Defense services in crisis situations to volunteer firefighters.
Every citizen will be able to count on immediate assistance to protect their property from destruction.
With government funds, we will create a network of crisis warehouses equipped with, among other things, in power generators or materials necessary to repair damaged roofs.
POLAND STRONG IN THE EU
Recovering 100 billion zlotys for Poland
Pragmatic policy of our country
Rebuilding cooperation with Germany and France
We will overcome the ineffectiveness and passivity of PiS in the work of the European Union
and the relegation of Poland to the EU second league.
We will do everything to ensure that the European Union budget for 2021–2027 is clearly more beneficial for our country than the current proposal, which assumes PLN 100 billion less than in the budget for 2014–2020.
We will obtain for Poland the position of a true co-leader of the EU, from which it will be possible to effectively take care of the interests of Poland and Poles, and to form alliances in its own and community matters.
We will ensure that the EU provides maximum support to Polish women and men in facing the challenges of the 21st century.
We will adhere to the principle of building changing coalitions within the EU to pursue Poland's national interests.
We will not be guided, as the current Polish government does, by ideological phobias and seeking support for the destruction of the rule of law in our country.
We will return to close cooperation with the largest EU countries, especially with Germany and France,
and for the countries of the region we will become a worthy representative and valued ally.
Thanks to this, we will be a natural link between the largest and smaller countries, Western and Central Europe, the Baltic and the Danube.
EUROPEAN BENEFITS
EU support for the fight against smog
EU support for healthcare
Roads and railways with EU money
The Civic Coalition will obtain support from the European Union budget for the production of safe, cheap and cleaner energy,
for anti-smog programs in Poland
and public transport, especially rail.
Thanks to this, we will complete the construction of local roads and highways.
We will fight for funds and lead to EU decisions supporting Polish public services, especially health care (including the European Cancer Programme)
, education and higher education.
We want Poles to be able to build their businesses on a global scale.
We will create a coherent system of supporting Polish economic interests and the interests of Polish enterprises abroad.
We will increase real diplomatic assistance for the Polish economy, especially for small and medium-sized enterprises.
We will effectively promote Polish exports and foreign investments.
Professional economic diplomacy is the Polish Investment and Trade Agency, strengthened in terms of staff and finances, also linked to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and supported by diplomatic missions.
The MFA will be advised in promoting the economy by the Economic Consultative Forum, composed of representatives of Polish companies.
SAFE POLAND
Combining the benefits of alliances with the US and Europe
Using the European Defence Fund
Poland's active eastern policy
Through professional foreign policy and diplomacy, we will counteract divisions between US and European allies.
We will strengthen NATO and Poland's allied position
and we will increase the resilience of the Polish state and the Western community to external infiltration, intelligence and propaganda activities.
We will base our relations with the United States on the principles of partnership, because America does not expect servility but professionalism.
We will again be active in European defence policy.
The European Defence Fund is an opportunity for the Polish arms industry.
We will restore Poland's active policy in the East, especially towards Ukraine.
RELIABLE POLAND
Poland, which once again arouses admiration and respect
Support for Polish projects worldwide
Promotion of Poland, not power abroad
The image of Poland as an aggressive and unreliable country created by the current government must be thoroughly changed as soon as possible.
We will restore the image of Poles as a community of people proud of their history and achievements, while at the same time cooperating closely with others.
We will de-partisanize, streamline and simplify the system of promoting Poland, which is currently implemented in a way that is harmful to citizens and the country’s reputation, among others. by the Polish National Foundation.
We will reform the Adam Mickiewicz Institute and link it with the global network of Polish institutions abroad.
HEALTH POLAND
EUROPEAN HEALTH CARE
Maximum 21 days to specialist
Maximum 60 minutes in the ER
Free IVF
and anesthesia during childbirth
The Polish health service is sick.
The absurd National Health Fund lump sum payment system that torpedoes effective and quick treatment, too few doctors, duplicate offers from hospitals fighting for survival, specialists whose hands are tied by bureaucracy, and sick Poles forced to storm emergency departments.
Finally: the lack of a real drug policy based on building stocks and becoming independent from foreign drug supplies in favor of domestic producers.
We need to heal healthcare before it stops healing patients.
Public spending on health care in Poland currently amounts to 4.7% of GDP.
The Civic Coalition wants it to be 6% of GDP – in reality, and not just on paper.
MAXIMUM 21 DAYS TO SPECIALIST
Freeing doctors from bureaucracy that takes up 80% of their time
Appointment of physician assistants and launch of such courses at university
Investing in hospital clinics by eliminating absurdities in the National Health Fund
Extensive bureaucracy currently leaves Polish doctors only 20% of their time for proper patient treatment.
The proportions should be reversed.
There are enough people in the healthcare system, including medical students, who can relieve doctors so that they can see many more patients and focus on diagnosing and treating them.
The Civic Coalition also wants to allocate appropriate funds for investment in outpatient treatment.
Hospital outpatient clinics are places where patients should find specialist help – the condition is that the National Health Fund stops financial harassment of outpatient clinics.
Today, in order not to get into debt, the hospital must admit a patient to the ward for 72 hours, even though it could help him during one day in the clinic.
EMERGENCY CARE IN AN HOUR
Full restoration of night and holiday shifts of primary healthcare workers
Elimination of financial harassment towards SORs by the National Health Fund
Emergency room patient with quick knowledge about what help he will receive
At night and on holidays, patients currently usually have only one address to which they can seek help – the Hospital Emergency Department.
This applies both to the person after the accident and to the one with the headache.
The Civic Coalition wants Primary Health Care to have the conditions to resume holiday and night shifts on a large scale, thus relieving and reducing queues at emergency departments.
Reducing the load on emergency departments will save the health and lives of seriously ill patients, and patients with non-life-threatening ailments will not have to wait many hours.
We will ensure that the ER patient receives care within the first 60 minutes and knows exactly what his treatment plan is.
At the same time, as in the case of queues for specialists, we will eliminate the absurdities in the operation of the National Health Fund, which pays for hospital wards but financially oppresses emergency departments, the consequence of which is that a hospital fighting for survival cannot strengthen its emergency department today.
ACCESS TO MEDICINES
Drug stocks as a strategic point of drug policy
Anticipating shortages and quick intervention purchases
Fighting the drug mafia for the good of the patient
The drug crisis has shown that the state is unable to provide access to medicines for Polish people.
We have a solution for this: firstly, state services (Department of Drug Policy and Pharmacy of the Ministry of Health, Chief Sanitary Inspector, etc.) should anticipate crises on the drug market in advance and prepare strategic stocks or decide on intervention purchases.
Secondly, the Civic Coalition will wage a real – and not just a paper – war against the illegal export of medicines.
This smuggling, worth PLN 2 billion annually, is a blow to the budget, but above all to the health of Poles.
FREE TESTS
Professional action that saves health
Regular health check-ups
A way to deal with lifestyle diseases
Health prevention should primarily translate into the health of every Pole, and not only into statistical values.
The Civic Coalition will introduce free cross-sectional tests for every Polish man and woman who has reached the age of 50.
Such tests can be repeated free of charge every 5 years.
This is the only way we can protect every citizen from many dangerous diseases.
This particularly concerns the exclusion or early treatment of cancer, cardiological diseases, as well as degenerations, osteoporosis and rheumatic diseases.
MODERN VACCINES
Equal access to childhood vaccines
Cutting-edge vaccines as standard, not luxury
A systemic shield against dangerous diseases
Vaccines, regardless of their price, are not a luxury, but a necessary shield against dangerous diseases.
The thickness of this shield cannot depend on the thickness of the parents' wallet.
The Civic Coalition will ensure that every Polish child will be able to be vaccinated for free with the most modern vaccines in accordance with the best world standards.
The state must actively oppose the superstitions promoted by anti-vaccination movements.
For the health and life of everyone, it is necessary that places in nurseries, kindergartens and schools are available only to vaccinated children.
EFFECTIVE FIGHT AGAINST CANCER
Oncologist as a treatment coordinator for a cancer patient
Establishment of cancer treatment centers for specific organs
European level of cancer cure rate in 7 years
The Civic Coalition will bring about a situation in which an oncologist will coordinate the therapy of a patient fighting cancer from beginning to end as the supervising physician, and not one of many specialists.
Creating a common standard of healthcare in the European Union will give us the automatic possibility of financing cancer treatment centers
and prevention and early detection of neoplastic lesions.
A few years ago we introduced the so-called fast track in oncological therapy, and now it is high time to take another decisive step forward.
We want the cancer cure rate in Poland to reach a level comparable to that of the most developed European countries within the next 7 years.
FREE IVF
A country that respects the birth of every child
A Recipe for Infertility That Is Independent of the Whims of Government
Restoring the chance to have a child to millions of Poles
The government cannot be the enemy of in vitro – by doing so it becomes the enemy of 1.5 million couples who have fertility problems and 21 thousand children who were born thanks to the program abandoned by the current government.
We say clearly: in vitro will be financed from the state budget.
TREATMENT COORDINATOR
Primary Health Care that helps with multi-track treatment
General practitioner working with specialists
Removing the obligation to coordinate treatment from Poles
Who now coordinates the treatment of Polish men and women? Often themselves.
Primary Health Care should function in an effective system in which the primary care physician coordinates the treatment of his patients, sending them to available and known specialists, and then serves as a guide in further, often multi-track, therapy.
In Poland, thousands of people take their elderly parents from specialist to specialist, summarizing the test results and effects of therapy themselves.
A state-supported system of cooperation between primary care physicians, hospitals and specialists must be created.
In well-functioning healthcare systems, when referring a patient to a specialist, a family doctor writes an e-mail or calls the specialist; doctors know each other and cooperate with each other, which benefits the patient.
COMFORT FOR DOCTORS
Doctors who can treat and do not have to go on strike
The end of the "factory" of specialists for foreign countries
Local government scholarships for medical students
Poland must stop being a “factory” of specialists for other countries.
One third of medical school graduates have gone abroad or are considering doing so.
Poland cannot afford to lose educated professionals at high cost.
The work of a doctor and nurse in Poland must be attractive both in terms of finances and opportunities for professional development and work with patients.
The Civic Coalition wants medical students to receive special local government scholarships starting in their second year of studies, which will allow them to start working in a nearby hospital when they become doctors.
Local communities can and must work to ensure that future specialists do not leave.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN PHARMACIES
A completely new source of help for patients
Providing pharmacists with specific qualifications
Legitimizing the natural role of the pharmacist
It is not without reason that Poles have great trust in pharmacists.
Pharmacy is one of the fields of study at medical universities, as difficult and responsible as the field of medicine.
That is why the Civic Coalition will introduce the possibility of pharmacists providing minor medical services, such as vaccinations or injections.
This will additionally relieve the burden on clinics and hospitals, and will significantly improve the comfort of treatment for Polish women and men.
UNION FOR PATIENTS
Common European Union health policy
Equal treatment levels with the best in Europe
The Union takes care of supporting Polish healthcare
The Civic Coalition wants to introduce a common European health policy.
Thanks to it, the EU will have to support Polish healthcare in a planned manner, and not by plugging holes.
Similar European policies exist in various fields, but not in the field of health.
A common policy is to be the basis of the European standard that we have been talking about in the Civic Coalition for a long time.
We will ensure that the Polish patient will become, also under European regulations, as important for the EU as the German or French patient.
POLAND IS PROSPEROUS
HIGHER WAGES AND AN ECONOMY FOR ALL
LOWER TAXES, HIGHER PAY
600 PLN, because work pays off
Lower ZUS contributions for small entrepreneurs
Exemption from PIT for a pension that is a supplement to salary
Scholarships to improve your qualifications, because learning pays off
The comfort of life of Polish women and men depends on the wealth of their wallets, which still falls short of the European standard.
There is no other way to achieve lasting, and it is worth emphasizing once again, lasting equalization of wages in Poland and Europe than through investment and innovation in the companies that employ us.
To do this, businesses need stability and a predictable government.
The current one, at odds with Europe, is closing the road to development and decent earnings for Poles.
Thanks to the “Lower Taxes, Higher Pay” program, the salaries of lower earners will increase by up to 47%, i.e. almost by half!
WORK PAYS OFF
Minimum wage – automatically half of the average wage
PIT and contributions to ZUS and NFZ will not exceed 35%
The income of lower earners, especially young people, is up to 40% higher
Work is a value.
Hard work must be respected.
The “Lower taxes, higher wages” program means an increase in the lowest wages by over PLN 600 per month.
That's almost 7.5 thousand zlotys per year!
The programme will benefit most from active people who work but earn less than PLN 4,500 per month.
They will receive a bonus for activity.
This is an offer that will clearly benefit residents of small towns.
Another group whose take-home income will increase significantly, by up to 40%, are young people.
The “Lower Taxes, Higher Wages” program will bring major benefits to employees of the public sector, social welfare, courts, cultural workers, teachers and doctoral students.
All employees will benefit from a reduction in PIT and the contributions they pay.
Today the government takes almost half of our salaries.
In the Civic Coalition we know how to ensure that more money stays in Poles' pockets.
After the reduction in PIT, contributions to ZUS and NFZ will not exceed 35%,
but at the same time pension and health benefits will be at a higher level.
The program will also simplify the calculation of contributions and PIT – only one operation is enough.
The revenues from the PIT will be transferred in their entirety to local governments.
We want the money to serve to meet the needs of Poles who pay taxes.
Local governments will also gain the right to compete with each other on the tax-free amount.
The minimum wage will not be subject to the whims of the government.
It will increase automatically and will amount to half of the average salary in the economy in the previous year.
Hourly wages in other contracts will increase similarly.
LEARNING PAYS OFF
Additional adult education
Even three-year scholarships for retraining
State pension for the duration of your studies
The demand for craftsmen in services and specialists in certain professional groups is growing from year to year.
In 2018, there was a shortage of over 100,000 people in this group, including welders, tailors, assemblers, hairdressers, bakers and confectioners.
Transport companies generate over 6% of Polish GDP, and this area also lacks 100,000 workers.
The situation is similar in the case of the nursing profession.
In Poland, there are 5 nurses per 1,000 people.
In Norway – 17.
Today, mainly unemployed people have the chance to retrain, but the scholarship offered to them is less than PLN 900.
We want to prevent anyone from dropping out of the job market just because the job does not meet their expectations.
Thanks to this, up to 50,000 people a year will be able to improve their qualifications.
We will introduce a training program for adult workers.
It will be aimed at anyone over 30 years of age who would like to improve their qualifications.
The minister responsible for the labour market will determine the list of vocational training courses covered by funding.
The state will pay for training lasting from 1 to 3 years
and will award minimum wage compensation to qualified program participants.
ACTIVITY PAYS OFF
The priority is the professional activity and experience of older people
Exemption from PIT for a pension that is a supplement to salary
Instead of unemployment benefits, high subsidies for moving to a new job
In professional work, with age one gains experience, which should be appreciated.
We want retirees to be able to continue working, be active and serve others with their knowledge if they want to.
Therefore, we will exempt the pension from personal income tax if it is an addition to the salary.
However, if a working person does not receive a pension, his or her salary will be exempt from all contributions except health insurance contributions.
Additionally, the employer will also be exempt from the contribution provided that half of the savings goes to the employee.
The salary of such an employee will increase by up to 47%!
Long service experience will be rewarded with the so-called retirement bonus.
Polish women and men will become co-owners of State Treasury companies.
Their retirement accounts will be credited with share packages.
Anyone who works for 40 years will receive a share package worth 10,000 PLN.
After 50 years of work, the value of the package will increase to PLN 20,000.
These funds will become their private property.
No one on the labor market will be condemned to unemployment.
If the dream job is located elsewhere in Poland, the state will pay for the relocation for the entire family, regardless of the age of the person looking for a new job.
Currently, this entitlement only applies to people under 30 years of age.
The elderly are condemned to unemployment in their place of residence with no chance for a new start.
IT PAYS TO WORK ON YOUR OWN OWN
Reducing labor costs for the smallest companies
Reduction of ZUS contributions for self-employed
Exemption from contributions for young people establishing companies
There are currently around 2 million companies in Poland.
The overwhelming majority are small entrepreneurs.
In total, approximately 4 million Poles work in micro-enterprises.
Poland will be among the twenty most entrepreneurship-friendly countries in the world.
Self-employment should be a choice, not an obligation.
We will support companies that grow faster than the economy – whether they are small, medium or large.
Thanks to our program, among others: Due to the reduction in PIT and ZUS contributions, employee salaries, especially in smaller companies, will increase, although employers will not have to contribute.
Today the state takes almost half of the income, after the changes it will be no more than 35%.
Additionally, employees whose salary does not exceed PLN 4,500 will receive an activity bonus from the budget.
In total, thanks to the reduction in PIT and ZUS contributions and bonuses, the lowest-paid employees will start receiving as much as they see on their pay slip.
Gross will become net!
The proposed changes also mean savings in accounting.
All that is needed is one tax and contribution transfer from the entire payroll fund in the company, instead of at least 14 operations for each employee – as is currently the case.
INVESTING PAYS OFF
We will rebuild the CIT tax structure into one that functions successfully in Estonia.
Companies will only pay tax on profits when they share them with their investors.
However, they will not pay this tax as long as the profit remains in the company, serving its development.
LOWER ZUS
ZUS contributions will be lower.
The basis for their calculation will no longer be any forecast of the average salary arbitrarily defined by the government.
We will take the minimum wage as the basis for calculating contributions.
This is a fair and logical solution, which will additionally unify the system of social security contributions from entrepreneurs.
The preferential contribution base that can be used for the first 24 months of running a business is also set in relation to the minimum wage (at 30% of its amount).
If such a solution were in force today, this relief would almost fully compensate entrepreneurs for the increase in social and health insurance contributions during the PiS government.
PREGNANT WOMEN'S BENEFITS
Sickness benefits for pregnant women will be financed immediately by ZUS.
This means that the employer will not have to pay it from its own funds for the first 33 days.
Thanks to this, the situation of women on the labor market will improve significantly.
Employers will not perceive the employment of a young woman as a potential risk to financing sickness benefits during pregnancy and will be more willing to employ women.
As a result, women will earn more and the pay gap will decrease.
FAST VAT REFUND
VAT refunds for honest entrepreneurs will be faster and more efficient.
Today, the blocking of VAT refunds often causes companies to lose liquidity and, consequently, may lead to bankruptcy.
Thanks to the solutions proposed by the Civic Coalition, if additional verification of the payer becomes necessary, there will be no delay in the payment of the full amount of the VAT refund.
Only the part that raises doubts of the tax office will be suspended and examined.
ONLINE AGREEMENTS
It will be possible to conclude simple contracts via the Internet, facilitating the functioning of even smaller companies.
This applies in particular to leasing contracts, which play an important role in financing investments by small and medium-sized enterprises.
SIMPLE TAXES
The current tax card rates are very complicated.
The annual notice setting out their amounts is over 30 pages long.
For example, blacksmith services can be taxed at 12 different rates.
Business rates also vary depending on the size of the town.
However, these differences are small – usually a dozen or so zlotys.
The Civic Coalition will radically simplify these rules.
We will eliminate the differentiation of rates depending on the size of the town in which the business is conducted.
This solution will reduce the burden on small entrepreneurs.
We especially want to relieve craftsmen from towns with more than 5,000 inhabitants, where traditional professions are rapidly disappearing.
Tax officials will no longer waste time on the annual preparation of documents determining the amount of tax,
and craftsmen will not have to study new rules every year.
Similarly, we will simplify lump sum contributions on recorded income.
Most of them have no practical significance.
For example, out of almost 500,000 entrepreneurs paying flat-rate tax, the 10% rate covered only 226 taxpayers.
FAST COMMUNICATION
The program of construction of national roads and district communication hubs
In the Civic Coalition we know that free movement and modern road infrastructure are evidence of the development and advancement of the state, as well as the quality of life of its citizens.
The construction of transport hubs, including international ones, enables faster economic development, increased investment and the creation of new jobs.
During the rule of the Civic Platform, the road and railway infrastructure saw rapid and fastest development in history.
In the years 2008–2011 we announced tenders for 1,540 km, and in the years 2012–2015 for 2,085 km of expressways – motorways and expressways.
After four years of PiS government, we have a total stagnation in construction.
We have noted numerous cancellations of announced tenders, as well as cases of termination of contracts already in progress.
In 2019, tenders were announced for 100.3 km of roads and at the same time contracts for approximately 220 km were terminated.
As a result of this policy, we face the risk of not using EU funds for two major infrastructure programmes.
MORE ROADS AND RAILWAYS
Restoration of the national road construction programme in full
The priority of the Civic Coalition will be to restore the dynamic expansion of the road and highway network throughout Poland.
This will enable us to fulfil the commitment made when Poland joined the European Union, related to completing the expressway network in our country by 2030.
According to the assumptions adopted by the Civic Platform government, 3,900 km of roads and 57 bypasses should be built by 2025.
The implementation of the bypass construction program is all the more expected because transit bypassing residential areas will help achieve better air quality in cities.
Today, with the highest smog intensity in history in Poland, the development of bypasses around large cities is one of the most important actions dependent on the government's decisions.
COMMUNICATION JUNCTIONS
314 communication centers by 2025
Expansion of local connections
Development of regional railways
Many infrastructure differences need to be leveled out.
Especially outside large urban centers.
By 2025, 314 district communication centres should be established.
These will be modern transport hubs coordinating local road, bus and rail connections.
TRANSPORT STRATEGY
Redirection of heavy transport to rail
Reduction in transport rates
Expansion of the network of transshipment terminals
The new transport strategy requires strengthening rail transit.
The weight of goods to be transported has increased by an average of 50 million tonnes per year over the last decade.
This creates an urgent need to open new communication channels to relieve the load on Polish motorways and national roads.
The solution is to transfer container transport from roads to rail.
To this end, access rates to railway infrastructure will be reduced.
Unfortunately, today rail transport is inferior to road transport in terms of delivery time.
Therefore, the next step must be a strategy for expanding transshipment terminals, because their absence significantly extends the transport of goods by rail.
SAFE ROADS
Map of dangerous places
Strategy for the construction of lay-bys, safe intersections, sidewalks and cycle paths
Transparent reporting of road safety levels
Roads in Poland are still among the most dangerous in Europe.
Many Polish women and men lose their lives or health on Polish roads.
The Civic Coalition aims to create conditions that will reduce this tragic balance.
Poland loses almost PLN 50 billion annually due to road accidents.
This amount includes not only the material consequences of accidents, but also the cost of police work, rescue services, law enforcement and social insurance.
The strategy for eliminating dangerous places in Poland will include the reconstruction of intersections, the construction of pavements and bus bays, the reconstruction or construction of left- and right-turns and the creation of bicycle paths.
Throughout Poland, the General Directorate for National Roads and Motorways has identified approximately 3,000 places where these investments will save human lives.
APARTMENT FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
One-time co-financing of own contribution
Program for people up to 35 years of age
Preferences for young people
We will return to what has been proven, i.e. the “Housing for the Young” program of the Civic Platform government.
Thanks to him, over 100,000 young families have moved into their own home.
Housing policy must respond to citizens' preferences.
Therefore, it should include a program that will help them gain ownership of the apartment.
The MdM programme will be aimed at young people – up to 35 years of age, i.e. the group whose housing needs are the least met.
The age limit will not apply to families with three or more children whose housing needs are particularly high.
The program will include a one-off subsidy for the own contribution – ranging from 10% (single) to 30% (families with at least three children) of the replacement value of the apartment, depending on the location.
Initially, the program concerned the purchase of apartments on the primary market and we consider this assumption to be correct.
The solution to the housing problems in our country is to increase their number, and the only way to do this is to build new apartments.
APARTMENT FOR RENT
Rental housing investment subsidy program
Transfer of State Treasury real estate to local governments
Support for funds investing in rental properties
Housing policy must also respond to the greatest weakness of the housing market, which is the insufficient rental housing market.
Less than every twentieth household in Poland rents an apartment on the private market.
This percentage is much lower than in Western European countries (e.g. nine times lower than in Germany).
The development of the rental housing market will also have a positive impact on the professional mobility of Poles.
Following the example of "schetynówka" - roads built thanks to subsidies from the National Local Road Construction Programme - the Civic Coalition will create a programme of co-financing local government investments in rental apartments from the state budget.
We will transfer all revenues from income taxes and property of the State Treasury to local governments.
Today, these properties are owned by central government agencies and institutions staffed by party nominees.
Another necessary direction is to create incentives for corporate investments in rental apartments.
REIT type companies will be introduced (known in our country as companies investing in real estate rental).
In exchange for tax incentives, the companies will invest in rental apartments.
Professionalization of the rental market will increase the safety of tenants.
They will not be exposed to the risk of a private person renting their apartment suddenly withdrawing from the arrangements.
To accelerate these positive changes, we will make the possibility of using tax preferences conditional on providing tenants with protection against the risk of rent changes and the unexpected need to leave the rented apartment.
A BATHROOM IN EVERY HOUSE
Reconstruction of a million apartments without bathrooms
Improving the housing conditions of the poorest
Cooperation with local governments – Revitalization Fund
Having a bathroom in the apartment seems to be an obvious civilization standard.
Meanwhile, data from the Central Statistical Office indicate that almost a million apartments in Poland do not have a toilet, and half a million residential premises do not have running water.
Families living in such conditions need immediate support.
Especially since these are usually people with low incomes.
Together with local governments and the National Economy Bank, the Civic Coalition will create a Revitalization Fund that will help quickly improve the housing conditions of people in a difficult financial situation.
STRONG AGRICULTURE, RICH COUNTRYSIDE
32 billion euros – a new perspective for the Polish countryside
Farmers' right to agricultural land
Disaster fund and small retention
Over the last 30 years, the Polish countryside has undergone a process of enormous change.
Polish farmers, thanks to their hard work, successfully built agricultural potential while protecting the unique heritage of the Polish countryside.
Poland's membership in the European Union and the funds negotiated by the PO-PSL government: over EUR 30 billion for 2014–2020 under the Common Agricultural Policy and the Rural Development Programme have made it possible to meet the most important development needs of Polish agriculture.
However, new challenges are emerging, such as climate change, unfair competition or growing protectionism in trade, which Polish farmers cannot be left alone to deal with.
OPPORTUNITIES OF THE POLISH VILLAGE
European budget fair to Polish farmers
Distribution of EU and national funds adapted to the needs of farms
Support for small and medium-sized rural farms
The most urgent challenge is to guarantee Polish farmers EU funds at at least the same level as negotiated by the PO-PSL government.
Our goal is 32 billion euros for the Polish countryside.
Today, Brussels' offer for the development of Polish countryside is lower by as much as EUR 5 billion.
That is why it is so important that Polish farmers in Brussels are represented by a government that has already proven that it can negotiate effectively.
The Civic Coalition will negotiate a thorough reform of the Common Agricultural Policy
and securing the interests of Polish farmers.
The priority is to provide greater support for small and medium-sized rural farms, including: through higher direct payments per hectare.
It is crucial to ensure the development of not only large industrial farms, but also smaller family farms, organic and innovative agriculture.
At least PLN 2 billion will be allocated to the Young Farmers Support Programme in the form of direct payments.
LAND FOR FARMERS
The right to freely expand agricultural holdings
Reform of the National Support Centre for Agriculture
Creation of a strategic reserve
Draconian regulations on the sale of agricultural land introduced in 2016 by the current government have brought only harm to Polish farmers and the economy and restricted the right to dispose of one's own land.
According to NIK, in 2016 the price of 1 ha was over PLN 32 thousand, and in 2018 it dropped to approximately PLN 26 thousand.
In the Civic Coalition, we consider the right of farmers to agricultural land, free trade and free expansion of agricultural holdings to be indisputable.
We will therefore withdraw illogical, irrational and corruption-generating provisions restricting the trade in agricultural land,
we will liquidate the official power of the National Support Centre for Agriculture.
The total amount of land remaining in the Agricultural Property Resources of the State Treasury at the end of 2018 was 1,368,936 ha.
A strategic reserve of land belonging to the State Treasury will be created for infrastructure investments and support for the expansion of small farms.
HELP IN NATURAL DISASTERS
Disaster Fund for Rural Areas and Agriculture
A comprehensive program to combat the effects of drought
Small retention and expansion of deep wells
The newly established Disaster Fund for Rural Areas and Agriculture will concentrate currently dispersed aid funds for natural disasters,
but also to combat infectious diseases among farm animals, including ASF.
The Fund will replace earmarked reserves and gather aid funds in one place.
Applications will be accepted “close to farmers” by local government institutions so that the aid can be paid out as quickly as possible.
Water retention needs to be increased from approximately 5% to at least 15%.
The Civic Coalition government will create a comprehensive program to combat the effects of drought.
ECONOMIC SECURITY
Public debt below 30%
The power of the regulator, new tasks of the NBP
“2 for 1” – a mandatory rule of law-making
The last four years of government have seen a historic increase in public debt to over one trillion zlotys.
This means that every Pole has PLN 28,000 in debt that he or she is not aware of.
Poland is currently the country with the most unstable and unpredictable law in the European Union.
Last year alone, a record 32,000 pages of new laws and regulations were adopted.
Meanwhile, the economic security of Polish women and men should be based on transparent law and stable finances not only on a macro- but also micro-economy scale.
The main pillars of the microeconomic security of citizens will be the program "Lower taxes, higher wages"
and social investments.
These programs will guarantee citizens a secure income from work and retirement.
and wide access to social services.
The Civic Coalition will introduce reasonable discipline in public finances.
STABLE FINANCES
Prohibition of excessive state indebtedness in good economic times
Financial stability assessment by the National Bank of Poland
Public debt below 30%
Thanks to the solutions proposed by the Civic Coalition, public debt will fall below 30% of GDP by 2030.
A ban on state borrowing in good economic times will be introduced.
We will adopt as our medium-term budgetary objective the balance between public revenues and expenditures
and we will introduce a formula that systematically lowers prudential thresholds for public debt.
The NBP will regularly assess what part of the increase in public revenue comes from tightening and can be spent, and what part is the result of only good economic conditions and should be saved for worse times.
The difference in the national definition of public debt compared to the Eurostat definition will be removed.
A ban will also be introduced on granting loans and credits from the state budget to other public finance sector units for a period extending beyond the budget year.
REGULATOR POWER
Irrevocability of presidents of supervisory institutions and regulators
Financial supervision of the National Bank of Poland
Innovation through the so-called regulatory sandboxes
The presidents of supervisory and regulatory institutions will not be able to be dismissed during their term of office.
(apart from a limited list of situations, such as when they commit a crime).
Any supervision must be made independent of politicians.
Responsibility for financial supervision will be transferred to the National Bank of Poland.
The regulator will be able to allow the so-called regulatory sandboxes, i.e. pilot programs without a strict regulatory straitjacket.
Thanks to this, it will gain the competence to build an innovative, rather than a licensed, economy.
DEPARTITIONAL COMPANIES
De-partisanization of personnel
Register of candidates for the management bodies of State Treasury companies
Share of municipalities in the profits of small State Treasury companies
Departisanization of State Treasury companies is a priority for the Civic Coalition.
Therefore, the qualifications of all candidates for management and supervisory boards of State Treasury companies will be checked by entities specialising in human resources management, selected in a tender.
These entities will maintain a register of individuals who meet the highest professional standards.
Only people from this register will be able to be shortlisted for boards of directors in individual companies.
Profits from small companies with State Treasury shareholding will be allocated to municipal grants for education, health and infrastructure.
GOOD LAW
"2 for 1" - the principle of lawmaking
Lifting the Sunday trading ban
Simplified system for settling EU projects
By 2025, Poland will be among the twenty most entrepreneurship-friendly countries.
When enacting legislation, a mandatory "2 for 1" rule will be introduced: the adoption of any act imposing a new bureaucratic obligation on entrepreneurs will only be possible if two existing restrictions are removed.
Laws that fail to achieve their intended goals during systematic reviews will be repealed.
We will abolish the Sunday trading ban.
At the same time, all employees, not only those employed in trade, will be guaranteed the right to two free Sundays a month.
Regulations introduced by the current government that restrict competition will also be repealed, including in particular the “pharmacy for pharmacists” law and restrictions on the construction and modernization of wind farms.
We will simplify the settlement of projects co-financed by the European Union.
The guidelines regulating them will be relaxed, especially with regard to companies that do not have to apply public procurement law.
Price indexation in contracts will become the rule
and reasonably quick resolution of tenders.
TAXPAYER BILL OF RIGHTS
We will introduce a Taxpayer's Bill of Rights
and taxpayer service centers helping to fulfill tax obligations, of which there will be significantly fewer,
also due to the mandatory unification of tax interpretations.
Tax audits will not be a burden for honest taxpayers.
The importance of electronic controls will increase in relation to physical controls at the taxpayer's premises.
We will enable entrepreneurs to freely and automatically check the reliability of their contractors as taxpayers.
ECOLOGY POLAND
CLIMATE AND WATER
Clean air - end of smog
Save greenery and water
Clean up Poland – no more plastic
Smog kills at least 45,000 Polish people every year.
Drying up rivers, a growing problem with water shortages, expensive heating and bureaucratic difficulties related to the development of green, healthy energy are today's Polish reality.
Poland is on the brink of an ecological disaster.
Meanwhile, the current government has created a situation in which we may lose as much as PLN 35 billion in EU funds for combating air pollution.
According to the Civic Coalition, it is time to take decisive action to protect the environment.
At stake are not only billions of euros, but above all the health and quality of life of Polish women and men.
CLEAN AIR
Free replacement of furnaces and lower heating costs
One million private power generation installations by 2025
End of coal in energy by 2040
In Polish towns, the poisonous "smokestacks" – old, classless boilers and heating stoves – will be replaced by heat pumps and district heating.
We commit ourselves to eliminating coal in home and apartment heating by 2030, in district heating by 2035, and in the entire energy sector by 2040.
By 2025, 200,000 local installations will be created on the energy market, which will enable companies and local governments to produce energy.
Another million such installations will be built at homes, mainly using photovoltaic cells.
It will be possible to resell excess privately generated energy.
The clean air policy will be strengthened by the re-development of wind farms, which the current government plans to completely eliminate by 2035.
For the Civic Coalition it is important that residents, not the central government, decide whether a wind farm can be built in their neighbourhood.
GREEN AND WATER
Water Resources Protection Strategy
Urban planning policy of planting afforestation in urban areas
Expansion of national park areas
Poland is currently one of the countries with the smallest water resources in the European Union.
In managing water resources, our government will cooperate with local governments, entrepreneurs and social organizations.
We will subordinate the activities in the government structure of “water management” and the institution of “Polish Waters” to the Minister of Environmental Protection.
River regulation programs will be suspended
and we will use national and EU funds to support the river restoration programme in line with the Water Framework Directive.
We will stop drainage in wetlands
and we will order small retention in forests.
We will undertake comprehensive actions related to increasing water retention in built-up areas
and the economic use of rainwater and its storage.
Green Poland is a healthy future for our children.
The new urban planning policy, instead of “concreting” cities, will include a strategy for planting trees in urban areas, but also in wasteland.
We will protect the forest, instead of cutting it down.
In agreement with the local community, we will establish new and expand the areas of national parks.
The precious Białowieża Forest will become a national park in its entirety.
CLEAN POLAND
A universal deposit and security deposit system
Incentives to completely eliminate plastic bags
We need to clean up Poland.
Within three years, single-use plastic should be replaced by reusable packaging.
The reduction in plastic production will cover all single-use items that have non-plastic equivalents.
These actions will be taken in consultation with interested groups.
Our long-term goal is an economy based on a circular economy and a zero waste policy.
ZERO WASTE
Ban on bringing in garbage
We will introduce a universal deposit system for bottles and plastic packaging.
Goods with interchangeable containers should ultimately have lower prices.
In order to reduce the consumption of plastic bottles, the “water for everyone” project will be gradually implemented, i.e. a system of free drinking water stations for residents.
An absolute ban on bringing waste into Poland will be issued.
Our country cannot perish under tons of waste from all over the world.
No one will, under the pretext of importing secondary raw materials, flood Poland with waste that is a source of poisoning the area and a source of dangerous fires.
Wild or burning landfills, as well as chemical waste imported from abroad, will no longer threaten our families.
Public institutions will set a good example of behaviour that protects our natural environment by using reusable or biodegradable packaging.
Environmental protection education will be expanded in schools.
POWER ENGINEERING
Green energy for Poland
Warm house
Energy security
Just a decade ago, knowledge about climate threats was smaller, labour costs were lower and Polish coal was a sought-after global export.
Today Polish mines extract less, sell less, and earn less.
The current government has brought about record imports of Russian coal to Poland.
In 2018 it amounted to 14 million tonnes.
Meanwhile, electricity prices for companies and local governments are rising.
The Polish energy sector is in crisis.
Poland lacks an energy strategy, and the value of domestic energy companies, despite the global economic situation, has fallen by as much as 70%!
This is the lowest valuation in history.
Accelerating the process of repairing the energy and heating industry,
The Civic Coalition programme guarantees support for energy efficiency and renewable energy sources, primarily for the benefit of the consumer, but also for the climate.
DECLARATION FOR UPPER SILESIA
We will not close mines as long as there is coal in them and the costs of extraction allow for a decent living for miners and their families.
We will not close coal-fired power plants as long as they are able to operate.
There will come a time when the mines will run out of deposits and the power plants will become obsolete.
Therefore, the share of coal in the Polish economy will naturally decline.
We will not fire people who work in mines and coal-fired power plants.
In their place, we will finance the construction of modern, green energy sources that will create new jobs.
We will introduce this change systematically and rationally.
We will propose a stable plan for the industrial transformation of Silesia and other coal regions, including:
based on EU funds from the Coal Platform.
It will be created together not only with miners, but with all other employees of the energy industry.
This is the last moment to implement the strategy for mining in Silesia.
The industry, which employs more than 100,000 people, still does not know what its future will look like when natural resources are exhausted.
GREEN ENERGY
Environmentally friendly energy
3×10 for renewable energy
Preferential financing for green energy
The global energy landscape has changed more in the last five years than in the previous fifty.
New environmental regulations have appeared, and the cost of new green technologies, which are becoming a local source of energy, has been significantly reduced.
Solar energy has become up to 90% cheaper.
Meanwhile, in recent years Poland has been excluded from this inevitable transformation by its government.
More than half of Polish power plants are over 35 years old.
In the coming years, due to their deteriorating condition, costs and environmental standards, approximately 70% of coal-fired power plants will be phased out.
To ensure that no home is disconnected from electricity, we will ensure that over the next ten years at least 1/3 of energy comes from renewable sources, i.e. nature: wind, sun, water.
All those who want to invest in a friendly environment, but also in an efficient, safe energy economy, will receive state support.
This applies not only to companies and local governments, but also to citizens.
Thanks to this, by 2030, 10 GW of solar energy, 10 GW of offshore energy and 10 GW of onshore wind farms will be created in Poland (3×10 for RES).
We will provide support for local sources of renewable energy, biomass, biogas and geothermal energy.
As a result of regulatory changes, each potential investor will be able to assess the effectiveness of the investment, taking into account the time required to launch it and the conditions on which the possibility of implementing the investment depends.
We will allocate 100% of the proceeds from the sale of CO2 emission allowances to investments.
We commit to publishing annual reports on the Polish energy transformation: costs, prices, emissions, degree of energy independence.
WARM HOUSE
25 billion euros for a warm home
Modernization of heating infrastructure
Reducing heating bills
Poles breathe the worst air in Europe.
Of the 50 most polluted cities, 36 are in Poland.
The main reason is coal burned in individual furnaces.
That is why we will modernize the Polish heating network.
By 2030, all small heating systems in district towns will be transformed into efficient and low-emission, i.e. clean sources of heat in our homes.
Today, as many as 80% of heating systems in Poland fall below these expectations.
These activities will be supplemented by the continuation of the thermal modernization program introduced during the first period of the Civic Platform government.
After 2020, we will set standards for energy-efficient new and old buildings.
These changes will lead to lower heating bills in Polish homes.
We will also remove subsidy systems for large-scale energy from electricity bills.
Energy companies will stop draining customers' pockets and financing projects that make no economic sense.
COMMUNITY ENERGY
Eliminating energy poverty
Restoration of the thermal modernization subsidy system
Energy advisor in the commune
Energy poverty affects almost 5 million people in Poland.
The majority live in villages and small towns, 25% are pensioners.
These figures show that an alarming number of Poles today cannot afford to properly heat their own homes and pay their energy bills.
We will develop a system of subsidies for energy-excluded citizens.
The earmarked allowance for fuel will be modified.
We will create a mechanism for preferential loans for companies and citizens who want to invest in home renewable energy sources – solar panels, home windmills and heat pumps are the future.
Each of us, if we want, can become energetically independent.
The state will help in the process of building civic energy, not only through a subsidy system,
but also to make it possible to earn money by feeding surplus energy that citizens themselves produce into the local grid.
FUEL OF THE FUTURE
Hydrogen as the fuel of the future
An opportunity for ports and shipping
Potential for new industry: 5.5 million jobs
Hydrogen is the future.
This is likely the foundation for a global energy transformation.
Studies show that the hydrogen industry will create almost 5.5 million new jobs worldwide by 2050 and revolutionize transport.
Poland can be one of the leaders in this process.
Hydrogen can be produced anywhere, for example using renewable energy or waste disposal.
This is an optimal solution for smaller municipalities or even farms.
ENERGY SECURITY
Predictability of legal changes
Depoliticization of State Treasury companies
Reliability of energy supply
The state will guarantee predictability for entrepreneurs in the energy sector.
Decisions in State Treasury companies will be business, not political.
Today, the largest companies dependent on politicians are in a very difficult financial situation because they were forced to implement unrealistic orders: from the construction of a Polish electric car to the Polish National Foundation.
A long-term strategy for the energy sector will allow entrepreneurs to make a realistic assessment of the profitability of their investments.
Energy security is an effective policy of transition to Polish renewable energy,
smart grids and energy efficiency,
reducing dependence on foreign imports of fuel and energy.
It is also necessary to ensure diversification of supplies,
cross-border connections
and energy solidarity within the European Union.
We will fully integrate the Polish gas system with the European gas market by expanding interconnectors on the western and southern borders and with Ukraine.
At the same time, we will liberalize the storage law so that competition returns to the gas market and its real liberalization occurs.
ANIMAL RIGHTS
The End of Fur Farming
End of animal suffering in circuses
Industrial animal farming is one of the main sources of greenhouse gas emissions.
Its reduction is necessary for climatic, health and ethical reasons.
That is why we will bring about the adoption of a law leading to the closure of mink, fox and other fur farms.
We will also ban the use of animals in circuses
and we will end the cruel bird hunting.
POLAND EDUCATION AND CULTURE
The foundation of a free and strong society that respects the principles of democracy will always be education,
including civic education and, as a result, free science.
Our program of civic Poland begins with building a free and democratic school.
To be truly free, we will eliminate any possibility of politicians influencing school curricula.
We will establish a new, term-of-service National Education Commission, in which experts will prepare curricula and evaluate them.
A good education increases opportunities for future generations.
Flawed systemic solutions created by the current government and Anna Zalewska's ministry have resulted in deterioration of teaching conditions in over 1/3 of Polish schools.
Schools are open from 7:15 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., with access to classrooms, common rooms and gyms being particularly difficult.
Instead of the promised cost-free reform, the current government is charging local governments with the costs of its implementation: PLN 23 billion has already been allocated for this purpose from local government budgets, taking this money from other areas that are important for local communities.
As a result of the ill-considered education reform, the biggest crisis in education has occurred – a double cohort of students graduating from middle school and eighth grade.
Therefore, first of all, in cooperation with local governments, it is necessary to stabilize the situation in schools and create conditions for the development of modern education.
We will not make another ill-conceived revolution.
We will wisely repair the damage left by the previous one.
We will give Polish schools a new quality.
Taking care of a culture that is built on lasting and enduring values ​​is primarily about creating space for freedom of expression.
and free creative expression, including the right to artistic experimentation.
We will free creators and their work from the currently visible threat of any form of censorship: from bureaucratic to ideological.
For this purpose, inter alia: we will limit the omnipotence of the ministry and the minister of culture over artistic institutions and cultural events.
STABLE SCHOOL
School of practical science
No school bag and a warm meal
Decent pay for teachers
We propose a school in which the School Council and the General Assembly of the School will make decisions developed in open dialogue and with the involvement of all parties: students, teachers, parents, local government officials, and the socio-economic environment.
The school will focus on practical learning.
It will be friendly, interesting and safe.
School is supposed to give the child the opportunity to identify and develop talents, catch up with the effective help of teachers.
The school will provide a full educational service, ensuring: learning, upbringing, care, nutrition, sports, development of talents and interests, equal opportunities.
The school will be available to every student in need for 8-9 hours a day.
In addition to compulsory classes (in class groups), students will participate in group classes that develop skills, supplement deficiencies, correct dysfunctions, and prepare for activity in cultural and social life.
A long stay at school obliges to share a warm meal, which is an opportunity to develop healthy eating habits, fight obesity and other modern nutritional diseases.
A good school does not require children to carry backpacks.
The school bag cannot weigh more than 10% of the child's weight.
Textbooks should be replaced with modern educational materials,
and tutoring and homework – group work at school.
PROUD TEACHER
We will give teachers the promised pay raises and more autonomy.
They should be paid separately for working overtime and on days off.
We will leave the current teaching load.
In addition, we will offer real opportunities for decent earnings.
Longer active school hours will generate additional hours of care, upbringing and educational activities for willing teachers.
This will create opportunities to employ new teachers or provide additional contracts for those already working.
Every hour will be duly rewarded.
It will allow for an increase in the real wages of existing teachers and open schools to new employees.
We will ensure teacher autonomy – the implementation of the core curriculum cannot take up 100% of the lesson time.
There must be time for the teacher's and young people's own ideas.
LEARNING COMPETENCES
Content that is becoming crucial in life but is difficult to classify into one of the academic fields, e.g. civic, economic and business, health, or environmental competences, will be added to the core curriculum.
From an early age, children and young people should learn to work in teams, use project work skills, solve problems in areas that are not well understood, self-improvement and the ability to organize work independently.
The school will emphasize learning skills and the ability to innovate (creativity and innovation, critical thinking and problem-solving, communication and cooperation),
broadly understood digital competences (information analysis, media, knowledge of technology, cybersecurity),
competencies important in life and professional career (flexibility, adaptability, initiative and self-organisation, social and intercultural skills, work ethic, ability to lead).
EDUCATION IN LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
We will allow local governments to have a flexible school structure, to divide the eight-year primary school into individual segments.
An example could be a primary school in a smaller town with grades 1–3 close to the student, or in a larger town a collective school with grades 1–8, which must meet certain local and staffing requirements.
This solution will equalize opportunities between children from rural areas.
and larger centres and will allow for full use of the premises available to the commune.
Although we propose the principle of freedom here, we will introduce appropriate criteria, e.g. having a nature lab or a gym.
In this way, the local government will create school structures designed to meet the needs of the local community.
BETTER VOCATIONAL EDUCATION
Career counseling in schools
Schools of professionals
Professional internships in cooperation with entrepreneurs
Young people often feel lost when choosing a school, field of study or future profession.
We will change this state of affairs by implementing professional orientation programs and career counseling.
We will introduce careers advisors to schools.
Each student will have the right to individual career counseling,
and in the seventh grade of primary school and in the third grade of secondary school, he will receive a voluntary individual report on his professional predispositions, which may become an aid for him and his parents in choosing a further educational path.
These reports will also include current analysis of the labor market and wages in specific professions.
We will implement a strategy to rebuild the prestige of technical schools, breaking the stereotype of vocational schools as being worse than high schools.
Students of technical schools should learn practice from the best, have access to very good staff of methodologists, and facilities for establishing close cooperation with employers and businesses.
Schools require additional investment and equipping workshops with the latest generation of technical and technological infrastructure, including digital.
This will be a school for true professionals.
NATIONAL EDUCATION COMMISSION
The end of writing core curriculum by politicians
Dialogue with school principals, local governments and professional organizations
Expert work on the curriculum
We will put an end to politicians writing core curricula.
The school needs stability, continuity and security.
Today, only 20% of the 1.7 thousand authors of core curricula are people recommended by professional institutions.
Successive terms of parliament cannot overturn programmes under the influence of the views of the ruling majority.
We will therefore transfer the authority to build and evaluate the professional and transparent education system to the National Education Commission – autonomous and politically independent.
The commission's aim is to build a modern system that is capable of long-term planning and resistant to political pressure.
The KEN will be composed of representatives of teachers and teachers’ trade unions, school principals, local governments, employer and business organizations, parents, science and higher education, educational institutions and non-governmental organizations related to education.
FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
In the Civic Coalition program, we plan to build an educational bonus system for achievements, good results and high quality.
We will introduce educational scholarships for students linked to their school performance.
We will introduce educational bonuses for teachers linked to the performance of their students.
We will propose to local governments a program of co-financing (zloty for zloty) the expansion of the school base in places where the PiS government's deformation has resulted in the return of two-shift operation.
Light construction modules will allow you to quickly improve the local situation and create conditions for normal work.
DEVELOPMENT THROUGH CULTURE
Culture in alliance with science
Cheap access to culture
Investing in reading
We will integrate the activities of the Ministry of National Education and the Ministry of Culture and National Heritage in order to improve the quality of teaching
and educating for a conscious participation in culture.
We will make it easier for children and young people to access cultural events – a ticket to a performance, exhibition or concert at the Philharmonic will entitle them to free travel on public transport.
We will expand the scholarship system for artistically gifted youth.
We will also rebuild reading, among other things. by introducing an hour of reading aloud in schools, renewing library collections and opening libraries on Saturdays.
We will offer an annual voucher for books for children and young people from 3 to 21 years of age and support for bookstores in small towns.
We will also introduce an obligation to operate library points in shopping malls and newly built housing estates.
CREATIVE FREEDOM
The end of harassment of rebellious creators
Fair rules for staffing positions in cultural institutions
Scholarship system for creators
We will ensure freedom of all cultural activity and complete freedom of artistic expression and creative experimentation.
We will introduce expert competition rules both for the selection of authorities of cultural institutions,
as well as the allocation of financial resources from the central budget or aid funds.
We will introduce a similar procedure in the case of institutions and events financed by local governments.
We will limit the omnipotence of Ministry of Culture and National Heritage officials by obliging all local governments and ministries to create at least three-year budget projects for all cultural institutions.
We will restore 50% of the cost of generating revenue for creators.
We will launch a richer scholarship system for them, including year-round scholarship residencies and six-month stay scholarships for writers, poets, and composers.
FREEDOM OF CULTURE
Renewable contracts and grants
Support for institutions abroad
Locally Shared Funds
We will equalize the legal and financial possibilities of public cultural institutions, the third sector and private companies.
We will guarantee non-governmental organisations and individuals with real achievements in the field of promoting culture a verifiable system of renewable contracts and grants.
We will also increase financial support for the protection of monuments, including those in the former territories of the Republic of Poland that are now located outside the country's borders.
We will rebuild Polish cultural diplomacy.
We will consistently popularize Polish cultural heritage and contemporary artistic creation outside Poland in cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
We will restore the importance of the Adam Mickiewicz Institute, also through its contribution to the described process of restitution of Polish cultural diplomacy.
In addition, we will transfer some of the funds for culture, previously distributed centrally, to local operators, e.g. local government cultural institutions selected in a competition.
CULTURAL LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
Non-governmental cultural management
The return of the "Very Young Culture" program
Culture closer to Poles
We will strengthen cooperation between local governments and non-governmental organizations in creating cultural events.
We will expand their competences in the management of cultural institutions.
We will increase the possibility of organising events together with local and regional artistic institutions by co-financing the so-called cultural weekends for the inhabitants of the region and book fairs in rural areas.
We will restore the “Very Young Culture” programme, which has proven very successful in local communities located far from large agglomerations.
INTERNSHIP DURING STUDIES
Graduates ready for practical challenges
3 days of theory and 2 days of practice during studies
Faster academic careers
We will increase the importance of internships and placements at university level so that graduates are fully ready to take up employment after completing their studies.
The last semesters will be held in a 3+2 model (3 days of studies, 2 days of professional practice).
We will create a new model for the development of scientific talents,
our goal will be to make young scientists more independent,
transparency of procedures and a faster habilitation path,
habilitation for grants
and much greater availability of international post-docs.
WORLD UNIVERSITIES
Support for the university's international position
Full transparency of grant systems
Increased funding for research and development
We will support universities with aspirations.
We want at least one Polish university to be among the top hundred universities in the world.
and that universities can be local development leaders.
We will promote the integration of universities and fields of study, and stimulate high quality research and teaching.
We will focus on transparent and substantive competitions for scientific and teaching positions at public and private universities.
Personnel decisions will be open and related to professional advancement.
We will ensure full transparency of grant decisions.
We will also increase spending on research and development to 1% of GDP from public funds over the next 8 years.
DIGITIZATION IN SCIENCE
Full contact with the whole world
European work standards
Using science in the economy
By supporting new programmes, we will ensure the development of the knowledge and research necessary for real participation in the Digital Single Market.
We will enable the integration of Polish research teams with teams from EU countries in the area of ​​new technologies and ICT.
We will increase the participation of Polish research teams with their own scientific thought in European bodies dealing with the creation, development, regulation and management of the European Digital Single Market.
We will introduce incentives for the actual commercialization of knowledge in the economy.
We will open science by expanding access to publications and data.
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE
Learning accessible throughout life
Protection of Universities of the Third Age
Full online access to knowledge
We will create tools that will enable universities to become Centres for Continuing Education, i.e. lifelong learning.
We want them to support young student talents within academic classes in schools and university seminars for students.
We want higher education institutions to create and develop Universities of the Third Age.
We will financially support science festivals
and the establishment of the Polish Open Education and Science Network by universities, providing online access to knowledge
and learning opportunities for all generations,
in all disciplines with the possibility of obtaining professional certificates.
PROFITABLE LEARNING
Conditions for scientific careers in Poland
A better scholarship system for college students
Promotion of the most talented scientists
We cannot allow Poland to lose its most talented university employees, which is why we will ensure decent pay and good conditions for conducting research by Polish scientists.
Already from the first year of studies, a young person has the right to have their abilities and work appreciated, which is why at least 10-15% of those starting their studies with the best recruitment results will receive a scholarship for their academic achievements.
6. POLAND SENIOR
Thirteen permanently and every year
Retirement Bonus
Monthly care check
The essence of the Civic Coalition's program is to build a better, more efficient state that will rise to the challenges of the 21st century and serve our children well.
But the measure of the quality of any country is how it cares for seniors and their loved ones.
We think realistically about how to solve, for example, the problem of professional activity of Poles who take care of their parents.
Hence the project of special checks, leave and making senior care a professional and certified profession.
Seniors have the right to enjoy life, and state structures should make it easier for them to do so.
Our program for the oldest Poles is called "Senior Poland".
This is not just a slogan, but a guarantee that seniors will not be condemned to exclusion.
THIRTEENTH PENSION EVERY YEAR
Permanent guarantee of extra money
Help independent of the whims of the authorities
Thirteen is higher, the longer the work
Anyone who is not a senior citizen with a low pension does not know what it means to be lured with a thirteenth pension, but it is not guaranteed permanently.
The Thirteenth Pension for seniors cannot be dependent on the whims of the government, nor can it be a tool for pressuring older people to vote for this or that party, because otherwise they will not receive the money they are entitled to.
That is why the Civic Coalition is going to the elections with a simple commitment: the thirteenth pension will become a guaranteed benefit – so that seniors feel safer.
In addition, this benefit will also encourage people who have not yet retired to remain active for longer.
The thirteenth pension will be higher the longer a person has remained active, even if his or her work was low-paid.
RETIREMENT BONUS
Share packages for seniors
From 10 to 20 thousand zloty bonus
Unconditional guarantee
Seniors will be rewarded for long years of work with the so-called retirement bonus.
Polish women and men will become co-owners of State Treasury companies.
Their retirement accounts will be credited with share packages.
Anyone who works for 40 years will receive a share package worth 10,000 PLN.
After 50 years of work, the value of the package will increase to PLN 20,000.
These funds will become their private property.
CARE CHECK
PLN 1,000 for the care of a dependent person
Monthly financial support
No dilemma: care or work
In Poland, too many people face a tragic dilemma: work or care for parents.
The Civic Coalition wants the family to be together.
Nursing homes have a place, but they should only be a solution when there is no other option.
One such solution is a check we propose, which will allow you to finance the care of a senior.
Care checks will amount to up to half of the minimum wage, i.e. over PLN 1,000 in the case of a person with the highest degree of dependency.
This amount will increase with the minimum wage.
The check will be paid monthly if the loved one is professionally active.
This will allow her to continue her work.
If the senior does not have a loved one, he or she will also receive a check.
If a close relative does not work, then the provisions on caregiver allowance under another act on family benefits apply to them.
SUPPORT FOR THE DEEP
Introduction of the category of dependency
Rehabilitation and day care centers for the elderly
A system of adjudication that allows for effective help
Currently, we are able to determine, for example, the degree of disability, but apart from disability, there is also dependency, for example due to many neurological diseases or simply because the senior lacks the strength to perform everyday activities.
The Civic Coalition wants to introduce clear rules for determining the degree of dependency in Poland, so that the state will finally begin to take responsibility for the real problems of older people and begin to finance assistance to seniors and their families.
The care check system does not ignore the fact that dependency, although not a disability, can exclude someone from life, and therefore requires greater financial outlays from the senior and their loved ones to prevent this from happening.
This is an element of our pro-family policy.
Also very important in our program is the creation of a network of senior rehabilitation centers and day care homes for the elderly.
Old age cannot exclude or prevent contact with the world.
SENIOR ASSISTANTS
Professional, certified caregivers
No more uncertainty about who will help and how
State funding system
When looking for someone to care for a senior, Poles find themselves in a market of services whose quality they are unable to assess.
The service is often overpriced because where fear and uncertainty operate, the phenomenon of price increases occurs because loved ones "have no other choice".
The Civic Coalition found a solution.
We will create a system of legalization, certification and training of senior assistants – so that this type of work becomes a standardized service with a regulated price range.
A care check alone is not enough, Polish people must be sure that it will be used for a reasonable purpose: professional and rationally priced help.
Senior assistants will be able to be employed by both public institutions, e.g. social welfare centres, and private companies.
A professional group will be created, whose level of service will be guaranteed,
a the costs are borne by the senior and his/her relatives and co-financed from the state budget.
This is a much cheaper solution than forcing professionally active people to be excluded from the labour market because they have to devote all their time to caring for their loved ones.
LEAVES FOR CARERS
State-funded respite leave for carers
Vacation from work that is not at the expense of vacation time
Taking care of the needs of the whole family
The Civic Coalition thinks about the situation of older people in a forward-looking, systemic way and in the context of the situation of their families.
That is why we propose introducing two types of leave for loved ones of an elderly person.
The first is a fourteen-day respite leave to regain strength during long-term care for parents, for example.
It is the dependent person and their family who will decide what the care will look like during this time: whether it will be provided by a 24-hour care center or by a visiting caregiver.
The costs of organising care during the carer’s respite leave will be borne by the state.
The second type is fourteen days of unpaid carer's leave (or part-time work).
This is a solution when something disturbing suddenly happens to an elderly person close to us and time is needed to organize care.
Our proposal aims to prevent situations in which vacation time is used for care.
LIFE BAND
Immediate help in a critical situation
Modern remote care system
A sense of security for seniors and their loved ones
In the “Senior Poland” programme, we also propose the widespread use of life-saving wristbands that monitor health status.
Thanks to the wristbands, emergency services are notified in the event of a threat.
The equipment will be subsidized at 10% of the care check amount.
This solution frees both the senior and his or her loved ones from fear.
HOME SERVICES
Real help with home problems
"Handyman" on the phone
Transport for people with walking difficulties
We want to disseminate the excellent solutions for seniors introduced by our local government officials.
In Poznań, a package of services that provide real help to seniors works great.
It includes handyman services, i.e. help with minor repairs in apartments,
"life box", i.e. a set of information for paramedics for people living alone, which includes a questionnaire regarding health status, medications taken and their dosage, and allergens.
Seniors also highly value the “taxi for seniors” program, which makes it easier for people who have trouble moving around to get to a doctor or office, for example.
POWER FOR SENIORS
Seniors deciding about their own needs
Representation of seniors having influence on the state and local government
Helping seniors based on their local needs
There are over 8 million retirees and pensioners in Poland.
The question that remains unanswered is why their vote only matters when elections are approaching.
The Civic Coalition wants seniors to gain their rights, especially the right to vote in their own matters.
That is why we will appoint a Government Plenipotentiary for Senior Policy,
we will establish an inter-ministerial Senior Policy Council
and the Citizens' Parliament of Seniors, which will be the statutory representative of older people.
We will also strengthen and co-finance the Municipal Senior Councils and enable the establishment of such councils at the district and provincial levels.
Thanks to them, the National Senior Card will become a real profit, and the Local Senior Offices and the helpline for seniors will help define the actual needs of older people in a given area.
Many seniors want to be actively involved in life because they believe in the principle "nothing about us without us".
Old age should not and cannot deprive Poles of the ability to decide for themselves.
