The moderate Samlingspartiet, the Center Party, the People's Party Liberals and the Christian Democrats jointly seek the voters' trust in the 2010 election.
The alliance is our offer to the voters.
Together, we seek continued support for a government that looks out for the good of the entire country.
Our promise is to continue the work to make Sweden a better country for everyone.
The alliance is supported by an idea of ​​Sweden. We want to take responsibility for our country
and create good conditions for work
and welfare.
We want to lay the foundations for a just society
that holds together,
where people can feel safe,
take their own initiative and realize their ambitions
and there the family
and civil society stands strong.
A responsible policy not only guards the good in today's Sweden,
but also opens up for renewal.
Our Sweden begins with people.
We believe in her inherent strength and willingness to take responsibility.
Our starting point is that all people are different but have the same human value.
Regardless of background, everyone should have opportunities to grow and develop.
All people have the same right to a dignified life.
Not everyone wants and can live the same way,
but everyone must have opportunities to develop as independent people
and in communion with others.
Much has been accomplished during the years that the Alliance has been responsible for government.
In the 2010 election, we seek the voters' trust to continue that work.
Sweden is a good country to live in,
but everything in Sweden is not good. There is much more to do.
Together, we want to take continued responsibility for order and order in Sweden's economy.
We want more people to be able to stand on their own two feet and feel the joy of supporting themselves through their own work.
Among other things, this can reduce economic gaps in society.
More companies should start, grow and stay in Sweden.
We want all children to have a safe upbringing
and be able to go to a school where they get a chance to develop.
Healthcare and care must be characterized by accessibility,
quality
and freedom of choice.
Our higher education and research must be world-class.
People should not have to worry about being exposed to violence and crime.
Sweden must take responsibility for fighting poverty
and environmental and climate threats
globally.
The alliance also knows that there are limits to politics.
We have the ambition that the freedom of individuals, families and communities in civil society should increase.
The alliance rests on values ​​such as freedom,
responsibility
and justice.
We jointly seek the voters' support
with a desire to seek broad solutions that can bring Sweden together for the future.
The Alliance's promise to voters in 2006 was to restore the value of work
and break with a development where more and more people are stuck in exclusion.
During the mandate period, we have made it more profitable to work.
It has become more profitable and easier to start and run a business
as well as hiring.
A policy that sorted people out of the labor market through long-term sick leave and early retirement has been replaced
with a policy that looks after each person's abilities
and which aims for everyone who can and wants to work to also be able to earn a living from their own work.
The alliance has safeguarded this political direction at the same time as we have taken responsibility for Sweden through a deep economic crisis.
The crisis was caused by a global financial crash in which greedy speculators took unreasonable risks.
The shortcomings in the financial regulations became clear.
Strong efforts have been made to meet the crisis
and combat the unemployment that followed in its wake.
This active crisis policy has been possible thanks to a responsible policy that protected public finances
and put jobs first.
Sweden is now on its way out of the crisis.
However, the recovery is fragile and requires continued responsibility.
We have to rebuild surpluses in the public finances.
The crucial challenge for the next mandate is to ensure the economic recovery
and to do everything to ensure that the negative effects of the crisis on unemployment and employment do not become permanent.
Then we can keep Sweden together
and continue to protect welfare.
With a different policy
threatens cuts in important welfare areas,
increased taxes
and impaired growth opportunities.
In addition, a lack of responsibility for the economy risks higher interest rates that erode households' margins
and negatively affects the companies' investments
and new hires.
Sweden cannot afford any experiments that risk threatening our uniquely strong position.
Implementing large-scale and unfunded spending increases would quickly erode public finances.
Carrying out major expansions of compensation and benefit systems would mean fewer jobs
and that unemployment was stuck at a high level.
Tax increases on work or business would threaten growth as well
like the jobs,
the public finances
and finally welfare.
Those who suffer the worst if the economy is careless are the most vulnerable
- those who most need well-functioning childcare,
school
or healthcare
and those who depend on the security systems to function in the event of illness or unemployment.
The alliance will therefore not compromise on responsibility for public finances.
The Alliance's election manifesto must be seen against this background.
While many countries in our surrounding world are now debating what cuts and tax increases are required to combat growing deficits and economic imbalances, we assess that for 2011 there is limited room for reform.
Towards the end of the mandate period, our assessment is that this scope for reform is growing.
However, the forecasts are uncertain. An uncertain future scope for reform, which also only arises towards the end of the next mandate period, should not be mortgaged too quickly.
The proposals in the election manifesto are therefore presented partly as concrete and detailed proposals for 2011, partly as reform ambitions that apply to the term of office, which are only implemented at the rate that surpluses can be secured.
The reform space must primarily be used to protect and develop welfare
and to further improve the conditions of work
and entrepreneurship.
However, the possibilities of implementing the proposals are strictly conditional on public finances not being endangered.
It may be necessary to refrain from implementing or delay reforms or provide additional funding if public finances turn out to be worse than expected.
The alliance has made it more profitable to work.
Income taxes have been reduced through the employment tax credit.
The welfare systems have been reformed so that they promote a return to work.
The A fund has been reformed.
Better motivation and increased support have reduced ill health.
Fewer people are sick today.
Our educational initiatives
has meant that more people have had better opportunities for employment.
The conditions for doing business have improved, i.a. through reduced taxes
and simpler rules.
In the aftermath of the crisis, it is important that unemployment is not allowed to get stuck at a high level, as it was after the crisis in the 1990s.
Those who have lost their jobs in the wake of the crisis must quickly get back to work.
Sweden must be a country where it pays to work,
more people want to hire
and more companies can start and grow.
It lays the foundation for a Sweden that stands strong when the economy takes off.
We therefore prioritize proposals that ensure that the recovery continues,
that the jobs
and there are more companies
and that unemployment is falling.
It will also require targeted efforts against those with a weak anchorage in the labor market.
This applies to older unemployed people,
disabled
and those born abroad who are at risk of being left out when the economy generally turns.
This also applies to young people,
who must get improved opportunities for early contact with the labor market.
Young people should not have to enter the adult world unemployed.
We therefore reject all thoughts of greatly increasing the cost of employment for young people
and instead wants to continue to make it easier in every way for young people to get a job.
We are not going to give up until everyone who can and wants to work is also given the opportunity to get a job.
Work gives people the opportunity to earn their own wages,
working community
and the opportunity to shape your own everyday life.
More people in work are needed if we are to be able to strengthen welfare
and design a policy to support those who are not working.
The demographic development with more and more elderly people also underlines the importance of a policy for work.
Work is the basis of our common welfare.
A prerequisite for securing growth
and welfare
in the longer term is that Sweden is equipped with knowledge.
Sweden must have a world-class school and education.
A good education improves people's knowledge,
skills
and self-esteem.
By giving all children and young people the opportunity for a good education
improve life chances,
increases justice
and increases their future opportunities.
It increases the chances of getting a job,
a good salary to live on
and strengthens opportunities for participation in society.
The alliance is the guarantor of increased investment in schools and education.
It is our belief that when each child receives support and stimulation to grow based on their specific circumstances
not only a more just society is created
- it also means that Sweden can continue to assert itself in the increasingly tough international competition.
Our common welfare,
the competitiveness of our companies
and the great challenges of our time
is best met by increased knowledge.
Sweden must be a good welfare country.
Welfare must maintain the highest possible quality
and benefit everyone.
The basis for getting there is solidarity and public funding.
Welfare's activities and services must be targeted at individual people as needed
, regardless of income
and background.
Through good and publicly funded care and care
life conditions are equalized between people.
During the past mandate period, the Alliance government has carried out many reforms for high quality,
more freedom of choice
and increased accessibility in Swedish welfare.
Important steps have been taken for a school that better sees each student,
safe care
without queues
and a worthy one
and secure care.
At the same time, we have protected welfare in the crisis.
As other countries have been and are being forced to make major cuts, we have thanks to a responsible policy
able to add historically high contributions to welfare.
A developed welfare
is for the Alliance a matter of justice.
All children and young people must be given a good start in life.
It requires a family policy of freedom of choice
and a school that provides knowledge and opportunities for all students to develop.
place of residence,
sex
or the thickness of the wallet should not matter when we need health care.
It requires additional efforts for healthcare and care
with equality,
quality
and dignity.
The future will require continued reforms for high quality in publicly funded welfare.
The influence over Swedish welfare must increase for citizens as well
as an employee.
Through new opportunities to start and run welfare companies
not least women are given new career paths and opportunities
at the same time as the diversity
and quality increases for citizens.
Welfare must continue to be strengthened.
By prioritizing welfare activities
we want to create conditions for everyone, regardless of living conditions, to shape their lives.
By supporting those particularly affected by the crisis
we hold Sweden together.
Through increased space for individuals, families and associations, people are given increased power over their own existence.
It can be created through reduced taxes,
simpler rules
and increased freedom of choice.
Our goal is a welfare that can offer all citizens a good service
based on one's needs.
Where we give welfare employees the tools they need to do a good job.
Where we step by step implement reforms that improve and strengthen healthcare,
elderly care
and other important welfare activities.
We want to take advantage of the quality of Swedish welfare.
We want to protect welfare activities.
This is more important than increased compensation levels in the social insurance systems
and unemployment insurance.
In order to bridge the weak income development in 2011, we want, in addition to the permanent increase of SEK 5 billion, to provide the municipal sector with a temporary state grant of SEK 3 billion in 2011.
All in all, this means that the municipal sector has received SEK 32 billion at the 2011 level in relation to 2006.
These are resources we want to go to protect municipal core activities, such as healthcare,
care
and activities aimed at children and young people.
Sweden must be a fair society
that hold together.
Regardless of background, everyone should have opportunities to grow and develop as independent people.
Background,
ethnicity
or gender should not determine what path choices each person can make in life.
Sweden should be a country where it is more important where you are going than where you come from.
For everyone to have equal chances in life
the school must give all students the conditions and tools for the future.
By seeing each child's unique possibilities
and challenge each student to achieve new goals
the school must arouse curiosity and the desire for learning.
There must be early warning systems for those who do not keep up and who need support and help to reach the school's goals;
not completing schooling is one of the most important reasons behind future exclusion.
Our social insurance systems must provide good income protection in the event of illness
and unemployment.
They exist to provide security and offer social bridges,
but we must not go back to the previous systems that drove away and actively excluded people from the labor market
and formed a breeding ground for exclusion and growing divides.
Therefore, the overall goal – that everyone who can work should also be able to get a job – must be clear.
Those who need help to get back into the labor market must also be able to get the support they need.
The non-profit efforts have an irreplaceable importance for a society that holds together.
Community and trust in society arise in the family,
among friends,
the workmates
and in civil society in general
. Associations, congregations and associations create meeting places that make Sweden a safer country
where people are seen and participate.
Our vision of Sweden is a fair society
that hold together.
People should feel safe,
able to take own initiative
and realize their life dreams.
Sweden today has a stronger economy than almost any other country in Europe.
We must guard that position for several reasons.
Strong public finances are a prerequisite for a stable recovery.
This creates room for important reforms in the coming years
. In addition, taking long-term responsibility for the Swedish economy is crucial for our ability to equip ourselves for the future.
Sweden's public finances are and must continue to be sustainable in the long term.
A statutory surplus target for public saving is a key tool to maintain this
. The budget rules with expenditure ceilings must be protected – not loosened.
Public debt must continue to decrease as a share of GDP.
We must not risk putting ourselves in a situation where we do not have the resources to handle crises
or make ourselves and our welfare dependent on the international loan markets.
The focus of the policy during the coming term is for the public finances to show a balance and surplus of 1 percent of GDP.
This is in line with the surplus target, which means that the public sector's financial savings should amount to an average of 1 percent of GDP over a business cycle.
The fiscal policy framework must continue to be maintained and strengthened.
The municipal balance requirement must be revised so that well-run municipalities and county councils in times of crisis can more easily use saved previous surpluses.
As part of a responsible economic policy, all reforms must be tested against the scope for reform.
It may be necessary to refrain from implementing or postpone reforms
or provide additional funding
if the economic development is weaker than expected,
or to secure socio-economic balance.
The public finances must achieve balance and a surplus of 1 percent of GDP so that the surplus target is maintained.
The expenditure ceilings must be protected and maintained.
The municipal balance requirement is being revised so that well-run municipalities and county councils in times of crisis can more easily use saved previous surpluses.
All reforms are tested against the reform space.
The alliance's main goal is to move Sweden towards full employment.
We want everyone who can work to also be able to get a job.
Few gaps are as large as between those who have work and those who are outside the labor market.
To provide more opportunities for work
is therefore the most fundamental question of justice.
The coalition government has therefore cut income taxes too low
- and middle income earners
so that people with ordinary incomes notice that their own efforts are paying off.
This has led to higher employment and reduced exclusion.
Work,
working community
and a salary of your own that you can live on
means power over one's own everyday life.
All people's skills and willingness to work must be utilized.
Everyone must have the opportunity to participate in working life based on their abilities and conditions.
Work is not only the basis of people's power over their own lives,
but also the basis for Sweden's prosperity.
The path to full employment is about re-establishing the line of work
and break with the exclusion from the labor market that developed over a long period of time.
We want it to pay off better to get an education
and work,
that it will be easier and cheaper to hire
and that more companies should be started, stay and grow in Sweden.
Sweden must be a country where it pays to work.
Reduced income taxes,
because, above all, low
- and middle income earners,
is an effective instrument for reducing exclusion,
increase sustainable employment
and make entrepreneurship more attractive.
It also increases people's power over their own everyday life.
With the employment tax deduction, a care assistant has had her tax reduced by almost SEK 1,500 per month, a metal worker by almost SEK 1,700 and a nurse by almost SEK 1,750. For the assistant nurse, the employment tax deduction means a whole extra monthly salary after tax each year.
The employment tax credit prevents unemployment from taking hold.
Increased motivation for work increases the labor supply.
This means that more people stay and remain active in the labor market.
By more people remaining in the workforce
increases the conditions for the economy to improve quickly.
Lower tax too low
- and middle income earners give more money in the wallet,
increased security
and stimulates household demand for goods and services.
The employment tax credit also strengthens mobility on the labor market,
which also increases the conditions for the economy to recover quickly.
A strengthened employment tax credit thus contributes to higher employment not only in 2010 but also in the future.
On top of the municipal income tax, state income tax is also paid today by teachers, nurses and police officers. Almost every third full-time working TCO member is estimated to pay state income tax in 2011. Among Saco members, it is more than half. In total, it is estimated that almost 30 percent of all full-time workers pay state income tax. This shows that the state income tax increasingly affects the most normal wage earners,
in addition to the fact that it risks creating negative effects for education.
This also applies after the coalition government's increase in 2009 of the limit for when state tax must be paid.
Further reduced income taxes within the scope of the employment tax credit
and the state income tax
are effective measures to increase the labor supply.
When it pays to work, more people want to work
and thus labor supply and employment rise,
which increases the Swedish economy's opportunities for long-term growth.
This creates more resources for public welfare.
Further reductions in income taxes for mainly low
- and middle income earners in the form of a fifth step in the employment tax credit should be implemented
when the public finances and the economy so permit.
A further increase in the strata limit for state income tax is to be implemented
when the public finances and the economy so permit.
The special income tax for residents living abroad should also be reduced when a further strengthening of the employment tax deduction is implemented.
Sweden needs more companies and entrepreneurs.
An attractive entrepreneurial climate is central to employment,
productivity
and growth in the economy
and thus form the basis for positive development in all parts of the country.
By creating a dynamic business climate
and improved conditions for innovations
more people dare to invest in becoming entrepreneurs
and more entrepreneurs see Sweden as the most interesting country to start and run a business in.
A series of important reforms have been carried out during the term of office which improved the business climate and strengthened Sweden as a nation of entrepreneurs.
Further steps need to be taken in the coming years.
In Alliance's Sweden, curiosity, dreams and ideas will have the chance to grow and become business ideas and companies.
A viable and dynamic business life
is a central prerequisite for increased employment.
More and growing companies throughout the country
needed for jobs,
the development
and welfare.
Entrepreneurship and entrepreneurship must be encouraged.
The alliance intends to commission a broad investigation into corporate taxation, which aims to design taxation so that investment and employment are favored.
The investigation will analyze how different tax changes should be ranked.
In addition, the welfare tax is harmful to growth,
not least because it penalizes education
and entrepreneurship.
These tax changes do not fit within the economic framework of sharp election promises and reform ambitions proposed in the election manifesto.
If additional financial space arises, it is justified to implement further relief
to strengthen growth.
This applies, among other things, to corporation tax,
employer contributions,
the welfare tax,
risk capital deduction,
R&D deduction
and expert tax.
Our overall assessment is that there is no financial room to lower these growth-damaging taxes during the next term.
The coalition government has purposefully lowered taxes for entrepreneurs and on businesses,
reduced the costs of hiring,
reduced the regulatory burden for companies and opened more parts of the economy to entrepreneurs,
above all in the area of ​​welfare.
That work must continue.
Companies depend on the stability that order in public finances provides.
Together, this forms the basis for making Sweden more competitive
and to get more and growing companies.
The coalition government has taken extensive measures to stabilize the Swedish financial market
and thereby secure the companies' capital supply.
These efforts have been decisive for Swedish business life.
We want to continue the work to reduce the regulatory burden for small businesses.
The Regulatory Council must continue its work to reduce the regulatory burden on companies.
An investment in local and regional regulatory simplification is implemented
to create a noticeable change in the everyday life of companies.
We want to continue working towards the goal of companies having a single reporting opportunity.
Innovations and knowledge-intensive entrepreneurship are crucial
for our international competitiveness,
as well as for the companies' development power and adaptability.
Therefore, during the mandate period, we want to make a long-term investment in, among other things, service innovations,
incubators
and young people's innovations.
Companies in new sectors and industries that are started and run by both men and women must be encouraged.
The service sector is labor intensive. Lower VAT on restaurant and catering services creates many new jobs,
not least for young people.
Tens of thousands of new jobs have been created through the RUT and ROT deductions.
Many unemployed have found jobs,
others have been able to work more
at the same time that everyday life has become easier, not least for families
and elderly throughout the country.
The design of the RUT deduction must be evaluated.
Sweden's ambitious climate and energy policy
creates good conditions for environmentally driven business development
and for secure energy supply to the country's businesses.
This development must continue.
ROUTE and
The ROT deductions must remain.
The investment in women's entrepreneurship continues.
Efforts for export promotion are strengthened
and is aimed at small and medium-sized enterprises.
The rule simplification work continues.
Innovation efforts are strengthened.
Advice and mentoring for entrepreneurs,
among other immigrants, is strengthened.
A halving of the VAT on restaurant and catering services must be implemented
when the public finances and the economy so permit.
The alliance believes that the state's task should normally be to specify the framework and rules that should apply to business and companies,
not to own and operate businesses.
Therefore, in principle, the state should not own companies that operate in commercial markets with functioning competition
- unless the company has a special social mission that is difficult to cope with in any other way.
Our assessment is that state ownership in the coming term should be reduced or liquidated in Nordea,
TeliaSonera
and SBAB.
This must be done so that the taxpayers' interests are protected in the best way.
Sales proceeds must be used to reduce the national debt.
LKAB should also be a company wholly owned by the state during the coming term.
The pharmacy reform has been successful.
No changes to the state's ownership in Apoteket AB are current during the coming term.
Vattenfall is by far the largest state-owned company and operates on an international market.
The government has carried out work on Vattenfall's future orientation, which resulted in the bill on clarified mission.
The state builds its long-term ownership responsibility on that basis and will continue to be the majority owner of the company.
However, other shareholders can be considered, in the form of e.g. The AP funds
or other long-term responsible owners.
The alliance believes in a Sweden where all parts of the country are given the opportunity to develop based on their strengths and conditions.
Allowing the whole of Sweden to grow is about confirming the conditions for housing,
work
and entrepreneurship
throughout the country.
Our communications, both physical and electronic,
is of great importance for people to be able to work throughout the country
and is at the same time fundamental to the competitiveness of business and the investment climate.
Expanded labor market regions increase mobility,
the competition
and thus employment.
Our ambitious energy and climate policy
creates investments and entrepreneurship
in the countryside.
The green industries are significant in Sweden's energy production.
Through a continued and expanded investment in Sweden as Europe's new food country
we create good conditions for good food,
entrepreneurship
as well as a growing tourism industry throughout the country.
An investigation is testing the possibility of allowing farm sales of alcoholic beverages within the framework of Swedish alcohol policy.
Many children, young people and the elderly are served food from the public kitchens every day.
That food must be healthy and safe and free from unnecessary additives.
Milk, meat and eggs must come from animals that have had a good time.
To ensure that the entire country can grow
public and commercial service must be available throughout the country.
Through the Alliance's rural strategy and the rural program that has been drawn up
conditions in rural areas are to be further improved during the coming term.
A special investment is being made to strengthen the power of development in Norrland's interior.
Increased entrepreneurship and developed innovativeness
must contribute to the renewal of the economy.
A state fund for risk capital - Inlandsinnovation - is established
and must work together with private and public actors.
The possibilities of our cities to be engines of growth
assumes railroad tracks
and roads in a well-functioning transport system
with, among other things, attractive public transport.
Extensive efforts are being made and will be made to increase accessibility on the road
and railway.
Good communications are also important for connecting city and country.
Many people want to live in the countryside and work in the city, which leads to larger labor market regions,
which in turn places new demands on the infrastructure.
Therefore, a number of important investment projects around the country will be implemented.
This applies not least to Förbifart Stockholm and the West Swedish infrastructure package.
The coalition government has recently decided on a historic infrastructure investment across the country,
mainly on roads
and railways
but also on flights
and shipping, which amounts to almost SEK 500 billion until 2021.
The infrastructure planning must have a perspective that covers all modes of transport
railway,
flight
and shipping must work together.
For the whole of Sweden to grow
strengthened conditions for entrepreneurship are also required
outside our major cities and in the countryside.
Not least, the taxation of business transport must be reasonable.
Therefore, no mileage tax should be introduced.
Northern Sweden contributes important raw material exports to large parts of Europe
which requires efficient and reliable road,
railway
and sea transport.
Sweden today has world-class broadband. Good electronic communications make everyday life easier
and is a prerequisite for entrepreneurs
must be able to conduct business throughout the country.
The conditions and costs for high-speed railways in Sweden need further investigation.
Furthermore, the need for and possibilities for a new fixed Öresund connection for road and rail should be investigated.
A number of infrastructure projects are carried out in order to have a coherent and well-functioning transport system.
Road maintenance efforts
and railway
shall continue to improve the accessibility and quality of the transport system.
Efforts are being made to enable the development of good public transport solutions.
The dispensations from the fourth stage of the pump act must be made permanent.
A state fund for investments in Norrland's hinterland – Inlandsinnovation – will be established.
Among other things, through the initiative Matlandet, the green industries' opportunities to create investments and entrepreneurship are taken advantage of
in the countryside.
Access to good service throughout the country is strengthened.
Access to good electronic communications throughout the country is improving.
An active labor market policy maintains people's contact with the labor market.
Therefore, we want to continue with an increased focus on coaching,
work experience,
practical skills development,
labor market education
and regular education.
Start-up jobs, entry-level jobs for foreign-born people
and the rehabilitation chain for those on sick leave
constitute other important parts of an active labor market policy to support and encourage people to seek their return to the labor market,
Job
and own salary.
They emphasize the employer's social responsibility
and the opportunity to hire also those who have been outside for a long time.
The reform of the Employment Service has contributed to a better functioning labor market.
It has been particularly important that Arbetsförmedlingen focused on the main goal – to provide jobs.
More and complementary actors have been admitted into job placement and coaching of the unemployed.
This development should continue.
During the term of office, the coalition government has implemented changes in labor law to increase flexibility in the labor market
while maintaining a reasonable balance between the labor market partners
and with good security for the employee.
The reforms have contributed to developing the Swedish model.
The alliance believes that the Swedish model forms a good basis for a well-functioning labor market.
To further increase the opportunity for certain groups who find it difficult to establish themselves in the labor market
and to make more small businesses dare to hire, some changes will be implemented
The alliance proposes that a special apprenticeship trial employment form be introduced.
For people younger than 23 years of age, it should be possible to participate in an apprenticeship trial employment of up to 18 months within the current regulations for trial employment and with a dispositive orientation.
The conditions must be regulated as usual in the Swedish labor market through collective agreements.
The employer is responsible for the employment being given an educational content.
The alliance also intends to limit the employer's costs in the event of a dispute about dismissal.
A special labor law regulation will be introduced for upper secondary school apprentices.
The needs of the future labor market are many. In addition to stimulating more people to work higher up in the ages
the thresholds for young people's entry into working life must be reduced.
Increased mobility, both geographically and in terms of skills, needs to be encouraged
and bottleneck problems are counteracted.
A faster integration into working life for people with a foreign background must be achieved
. The alliance believes that the parties in the labor market have a primary responsibility for developing the regulatory framework in such a direction.
The alliance will closely monitor developments in the labor market in order to ensure a flexible labor market
must be able to be combined with security for the individual.
There are now clear signs that the labor market will recover in 2010.
The brighter outlook means that measures to mitigate the consequences of the crisis on the labor market should be gradually adapted to the new labor market situation.
In 2011, there is still a need for active efforts to support the short-term unemployed
. Work placement and coaching are two efforts
which enables people affected by unemployment to quickly receive support back to work.
This reduces the risk of losing a foothold in the labor market and long-term unemployment.
Apprentice trial employment is introduced.
The Mediation Institute is given a clearer mission to inform entrepreneurs about current rules on labor law and collective agreements.
Employers' costs in the event of a dispute about dismissal are limited.
The folk high school initiative to support those who need more of a basic education
to improve their opportunities on the labor market is extended by one year
and is extended to all unemployed young people under the age of 25.
Young people between the ages of 20-24 who have left primary or secondary school without complete grades by 1/7 2010 at the latest and who are enrolled in one of the guarantees from 2011
must be able to grant the so-called higher tuition fee,
so that they can supplement their grades at komvux.
The qualification period in the job guarantee for young people is changed in that young people must be able to qualify for the guarantee by having been unemployed for a total of three months within a framework period of four months and registered as a job seeker with the Employment Service.
The employment service is provided with additional resources in order to be able to maintain the quality of the operations.
The social insurances
and unemployment insurance fulfills an important security function
and must be designed so that employment, activity and work are encouraged
and contribution fraud is prevented.
They must build on active efforts to give everyone with the opportunity to return to work support and help.
Efforts should be made to ensure that payments from the Social Insurance Agency and other authorities are made on time.
Extensive reform work has taken place within the security systems during the mandate period.
The passivity that previously characterized the process has been replaced with active measures.
Big changes always lead to concern that individuals will be caught in a pinch, something you have to be humble about. In the coming term, the political task is above all to nurture the reforms that have been carried out and ensure that they have the intended effect, and not unwanted effects.
In the spring of 2010, the coalition government appointed a parliamentary inquiry to review how sickness and unemployment insurance can be improved in the long term
to become cohesive, balanced and sustainable,
and contribute to higher long-term employment.
The alliance wants to introduce general income insurance in case of unemployment.
However, how such a scheme should be designed without having negative effects on the functioning of the labor market is complicated and the issue is being investigated by the parliamentary social insurance inquiry.
When the investigation has submitted its proposal, the Alliance will take a position on when and how a mandatory social security fund can be introduced.
Many people with disabilities are far from the labor market.
The basic starting point for us is that all people's skills and willingness to work must be taken into account.
Everyone must have the opportunity to participate in working life based on their abilities and conditions
. The conditions for people with disabilities to be able to find, get and keep a job within the state, municipality and county council as well as business must be improved.
This is necessary in order to make better use of the skills and resources available in society.
The work to identify and remove the obstacles that currently exist in the labor market for people with disabilities that lead to reduced work ability must be continued and strengthened,
not least this applies to women with disabilities.
Increased efforts are being made to offer work to people who have been far from the labor market for a long time, for example due to a disability.
The ceiling of the special employment support is raised
and the qualification period is extended
to better support people who are far from the labor market.
The employment agency must more clearly prioritize people with disabilities.
Youth unemployment is still too high in Sweden.
At the same time, almost half of the young people who are counted as unemployed in the statistics are studying full-time, even if they themselves most often consider themselves primarily students.
Furthermore, young people are less likely than older people to be long-term unemployed.
Their unemployment is often interspersed with shorter periods of work.
At the same time, the group that has not completed their high school studies runs a higher risk of getting stuck in long-term exclusion.
It is also serious that there is a relatively large group of young people who are neither studying, working nor looking for a job.
When a young person ends up in long-term exclusion, the loss is great for both the individual and society.
The work to avoid young people getting stuck in passive activity compensation must continue.
Through various measures, the coalition government has facilitated young people's path into working life.
Possibilities for temporary employment were expanded early in the mandate period
and employer contributions have been halved for young people under the age of 26,
which makes it significantly cheaper to hire young people.
New start jobs have been introduced, which gives employers who employ a young person who has been unemployed for more than six months a tax reduction corresponding to the entire employer's contribution.
There is a clear positive correlation between a completed upper secondary education and the chance of getting a job.
It is therefore central that the education system can raise the percentage who leave upper secondary school with full grades.
With the new upper secondary school, which will enter into force in 2011, there are great opportunities to improve results.
It is also important that young people who have dropped out of school for various reasons can come back and complete their studies.
The school also has an important role in stimulating young people.
to a greater extent dare to start and run businesses.
An inquiry has recently proposed a new form of temporary employment for high school students in apprenticeships.
A special labor law regulation for high school students, based on the inquiry's proposal, will be introduced by the Alliance.
The proposal aims to make it easier for young people to establish themselves in the labor market,
especially young people with low study motivation.
The introduction of probationary apprenticeships will also make it easier for young people to find work.
Lower VAT on restaurant and catering services
gives more young people the chance to get a job in the service sector.
The halved employer contribution
for young people is maintained.
A special labor law regulation
for high school apprentices is introduced.
Happily, the Swedish population lives longer and maintains its health longer into old age. This means that the conditions for a longer working life increase.
The coalition government has through a simplified and extended job tax credit for the elderly
increased the motivation to work after normal retirement age.
We have also removed the special payroll tax for people over 65,
which means that the costs of employing older people are now significantly lower than before.
It is beneficial for the individual, but also for the economy, that older people can participate longer in working life.
This development should be strengthened.
An increasing proportion of our elderly choose to work even after turning 65. Making it possible for older people to remain in working life means that valuable skills can be put to good use,
at the same time as it creates profits for both the individual and society.
Also seen from Sweden's demographic development with an aging population, which poses challenges for the economy
and welfare,
more older people in working life is valuable.
The fight against age discrimination in the labor market must be improved.
The right to remain in employment shall apply until age 69 instead of, as today, until age 67.
Unemployment is approximately twice as high and the percentage of employed is approximately ten percentage points lower among foreign-born compared to domestic-born
The foreign-born population in Sweden has approximately the same level of education as the rest of the population.
But on the other hand, education acquired abroad does not give the same return on the labor market as the equivalent Swedish education.
The coalition government has implemented several reforms to improve integration.
We want to continue developing this work.
The work for continuing education and competence development of the SFI teachers continues.
The possibility of introducing an SFI money is being investigated,
with the aim of increasing the opportunity for those who are going to attend the training to choose the organizer that best meets their own needs.
An inquiry is appointed which will review the possibility of introducing a system of tax breaks in particularly vulnerable areas, so-called fresh start zones.
Business with start-up offices continues.
Entry-level jobs are developed through an increase in the subsidy rate
and the coverage of the companies' costs for supervision.
A policy for jobs
and growth
is dependent on well-functioning housing and rental markets.
In several parts of the country, especially in the metropolitan areas, the housing shortage is
an obstacle to mobility in the labor market.
Freedom of choice and diversity on the housing market have been strengthened during the mandate period
i.a. through the abolition of the state property tax,
introduction of the new type of lease, owner-occupied apartments,
repealed permit requirement for condominium conversions
and tax relief when renting out your own home.
The alliance wants to investigate how the property taxation system can be abolished or significantly simplified.
Renting out your private home should be more affordable,
so that in this way we can create increased housing opportunities,
not least for young people.
More housing must be built.
Better functioning competition is needed in the construction market
and it must become more attractive to own and manage rental properties.
The government has laid a first foundation for this through the reform of the rent setting system in broad agreement with the parties. It is fixed.
The possibility of also strengthening the tenancy right's position in the Swedish housing market in other ways will be tested.
Part of the government's policy to create long-term improved conditions for housing construction
has been to dismantle distortive and cost-driving subsidies.
The forecasts for the coming year's housing construction show a sharp increase, albeit from low levels.
In order for investments in new housing to be at a level that is sustainable in the long term, firm rules of the game are still required.
The question of how the property taxation system can be abolished or significantly simplified must be investigated.
More housing opportunities are created by making the renting of private housing more affordable.
The standard deduction for such rental income is increased.
All people have the ability to learn and constantly reach new knowledge.
Giving every person the opportunity to develop and acquire knowledge - both theoretical and practical - is one of society's most important tasks.
By taking advantage of each person's opportunities and willingness to learn
we are laying the foundations for the Sweden of the future.
When every person receives support and stimulation to develop based on their conditions
a more just society is created.
A good school compensates for differences in the students' living conditions and conditions
and form the basis for people's future opportunities.
We want to see a school where all students get their due and where everyone, regardless of background
and gender,
gets good life chances and can develop.
A school with an increased focus on studying and knowledge
leads to increased justice.
Knowledge is the key that gives all students the opportunity to succeed.
A school which, however, does not put knowledge at the centre
primarily affects students with parents without their own higher education or with weak support from home.
This reinforces injustices and widens gaps.
Safe children learn more.
Therefore, a welcoming school environment, work against bullying is required
and that students' problems are taken seriously.
The importance of a well-functioning, high-quality education system cannot be overemphasized.
Education improves people's self-esteem, knowledge and abilities
and thereby improves the possibility of employment.
It contributes to a knowledge society
which gives equal opportunities to all people.
It strengthens groups that have difficulty establishing themselves in the labor market and reduces exclusion,
facilitates integration
and increases gender equality.
It provides insights into the values ​​society carries and the conditions for participation and active citizenship.
In addition, it is a prerequisite for a competitive business life.
The school is important for Sweden to become more entrepreneurial.
A good education is the foundation
so that everyone can shape their own future and make their own life choices.
An educational ideal that encourages people to discover new knowledge and achieve new insights
enriches the individual just as well
like society at large.
If Sweden is to be able to assert itself in the increasingly tough international competition
it is crucial that our schools and educations are among the best in the world.
In order to meet the challenges of the future, it is required that every pupil and every student have the opportunity to acquire new knowledge, new competences and abilities.
Herein lies the irreplaceable value of teachers.
Through their teaching, they should not only show the way to new knowledge
but also enthuse and give students keys to acquire it.
Together with the parents, the school must contribute to raising safe children and young people.
An active values-based work must support the students' development of their empathic ability
and their respect for the equal and inviolable human dignity of all people.
Confident students are more receptive to learning.
Studying is a prerequisite for knowledge.
An inquiry should be appointed to improve order and order in the classroom.
Cooperation between the school and parents must be improved
and parents must be able to attend school if a student is messy or has problems.
A major challenge is to counteract mental illness among young people.
The shortage of school nurses, counselors and psychologists is great.
The time for teaching is shrinking
when the teachers are forced to take an increasing responsibility for the students' mental health.
This needs to be met with reinforced measures.
School nurses and a functioning student health are central
in order to be able to help the students who feel bad in various ways.
A well-functioning student health is also central
so that teachers can be teachers
and to increase safety in the school.
Therefore, an investment must be made in student health during the next mandate period.
The experiences from successful schools show how, among other things, clear leadership,
high expectations for each student,
continuous follow-up and evaluation
and a positive climate between teachers and students
can promote very good results.
Within the framework of the Alliance's education policy, extensive reform work is underway to strengthen Sweden as a nation of knowledge.
The teacher lift,
better teacher training,
introduction of apprenticeships,
new and clear goals in school,
mandatory written reviews,
a new school team,
previous grades
and a new grading scale are some examples.
To this must be added reading-writing-counting effort,
more support for students who need extra support,
investment in mathematics,
sharper school inspection,
increased resources for research
, university of applied sciences
and new high school.
An experimental operation with a flexible school start is to be started.
An investigation is looking at the possibilities of introducing a system where students will be able to request re-examination of grades.
Practical educations must be revalued.
Vocational and apprenticeship training within upper secondary school must be developed.
Our work aims to improve the knowledge results
and ensure an equivalent quality in education
for all children and young people, regardless of circumstances.
Investments at a young age are important because mistakes made early are difficult to correct.
There are many indications that the decline in results in Swedish schools in recent decades can be explained by the fact that the actual teacher-led teaching has decreased.
Of central importance is implementing changes that make it possible to increase the time teachers spend actually teaching.
We are moving towards an increasingly knowledge-intensive society, which places high demands on the citizens' level of education.
A far-sighted education policy
based on people's differences
and aims to offer adults lifelong learning opportunities,
to change careers
or to develop within their profession.
A more flexible adult education gives, among other things, already working people the opportunity to study more adapted to their working life.
The alliance wants to test the possibilities of realizing a freedom of choice model for adult education.
In recent years, the resources for Swedish higher education have been significantly strengthened.
However, the resources are still not sufficient to guarantee that education is of sufficiently high quality everywhere.
A further reinforcement is carried out,
with emphasis on the humanities and social science subject areas
. A well-developed public study support
is an essential element of an ambitious and forward-looking education policy.
It is a question of giving all people equal chances
to realize their ambitions through their own efforts.
Sweden has one of the world's most generous student grants.
Still, many students struggle to make ends meet.
The study funds will be increased by SEK 500 per month.
A new teacher education with a focus on knowledge is being introduced.
The secondary school is being reformed
and the vocational courses are deepened and strengthened.
A new clearer and knowledge-oriented curriculum for the school is decided.
A new curriculum for the preschool with increased educational content is decided.
A new grading system and grades from grade six are introduced.
The students in the sixth form must complete national tests in the SO and NO subjects.
The link between study life and working life must be strengthened.
An obligation to report misbehavior in schools, preschools and after-school centers is introduced, a lex Sarah in the school.
An investigation is added to improve order and order in the classroom.
The change in principalship for the school that took place in 1991 is evaluated.
The alliance will not make any changes to the leadership during the mandate period.
The study funds are increased by increasing the loan portion by SEK 500 per month.
Investments in entrepreneurship in school must be developed.
The number of teaching hours in the school's lower grades must increase.
An investment is made in student health.
Investments in vocational training must continue and the university of applied sciences will develop.
Every student must have the right to go to a school where the activities are characterized by respect and work tranquility.
Actions against bullying
and to strengthen the value-based work are important building blocks for improving the school.
A quality investment in higher education is implemented.
Research has an important role as a creative and improving force for social development.
Our researchers are constantly pushing the boundaries of what is humanly possible.
Serious illnesses,
the climate
and the energy issue are some of the many challenges that can only be managed with increased knowledge.
Few, if any, investments provide greater long-term returns than education,
research
and innovation.
Research must be continuously improved
as Swedish competitiveness in a globalized world is dependent on a high content of knowledge in our products.
Active measures are needed so that Sweden can remain at the forefront of the scientific field
and that the jobs should remain in Sweden.
We want Sweden to remain a research nation of the highest rank.
To strengthen the power of innovation in the whole society
is crucial for more jobs,
competitiveness increase,
the production of goods and services become more efficient
and more environmentally friendly.
Sweden needs to get even better at taking advantage of new findings and translating them into new services and products.
A special innovation strategy will therefore be drawn up during the next term of office to streamline and coordinate efforts.
The alliance government's investments in research and innovation have already meant the largest resource addition to Swedish research ever.
The public and private investments in research and development in Sweden now reach almost 4 percent of GDP, which places us at the top.
At the same time, we cannot rest on our laurels.
We must continue to ensure that we are a prominent knowledge nation.
This can only happen through continued investment in research and innovation.
The independence of universities and colleges must increase.
The issue of deductibility for donations to research has been investigated, but the inquiry's proposal has received criticism.
We intend to return to this question in connection with the research and innovation bill.
Sweden has very good healthcare compared to many other countries.
The skills of the employees, medical standards and the technological development are in many areas at the forefront.
Several surveys show that trust in healthcare is high
and an increasingly large proportion of the population consider themselves to receive the care they need.
In recent years, the alliance has also carried out several reforms to improve quality
and availability,
as well as to strengthen the patient's freedom of choice in care.
The queue billion, which rewards county councils that achieve good results, has greatly shortened the queues.
The psychiatry initiative has improved psychiatric care around the country.
Through the pharmacy re-regulation, the availability of medicines has increased.
Choice of care in primary care has significantly increased accessibility
and the possibility of choosing a care center.
The number of health centers has increased significantly.
Although Swedish healthcare is good in many ways, there is more to do.
Care must be available,
safe and given as needed.
The possibility of receiving good care in time should not depend on whether you are male or female,
young or old,
born or immigrated to Sweden,
have higher or lower education
or income
nor of where in the country you live.
Care must be provided on equal terms.
One of the most important challenges is to ensure a fair
and equal care.
In order to improve the conditions for fair care, we must introduce a patient law.
The law must collect and clarify the obligations that care providers have towards their patients.
The law should also provide a way for the patient to quickly and easily have objections to the care tried
. The investigation that draws up the bill must highlight the direct costs
and the long-term public financial consequences of such legislative changes.
Healthcare is getting better at treating diseases associated with old age.
At the same time, there are structural problems in healthcare.
It mainly affects older people with the greatest needs,
those who have the hardest time making their voices heard.
During the next term of office, it must be a main task to improve care and care
for the sickest elderly.
Good care on equal terms for this group requires special measures.
One way to try is whether primary care can be given a precise elderly task.
The alliance wants to continue the work for a queue-free,
sure
and equal healthcare.
with increased focus on health.
The security for patients that they are not mistreated or mismedicated must increase.
Improved and more active patient safety work is good for the patient
and also provides benefits for society in the form of reduced suffering for patients
and reduced need for care.
Through improved patient safety
important resources can be freed up in healthcare,
which improves accessibility and access to care places.
A completely new patient safety law comes into force on 1 January 2011 to reduce the number of health care injuries.
In addition, the alliance now wants to take further steps in the important patient safety work through a national initiative.
An annual stimulus grant is given to the county councils to improve patient safety.
The money should be distributed to the county councils based on the results shown by each county council.
The work to remove the queues will continue and accessibility will be further improved.
The patient's position should be strengthened further through an enhanced care guarantee
which is gradually tightened within the framework of the queue billion.
A special effort is being made to reduce waiting times at the country's emergency departments.
Psychiatry has been a high priority during the past mandate period.
Municipalities and county councils have, among other things, received resources to improve accessibility in child and youth psychiatry
and further train staff.
In order to achieve long-term positive development, the investment is made permanent.
The alliance has carried out a significant reform for improved dental health
which meant a doubling of the state dental care support.
Especially for those with major dental care needs, costs have fallen sharply.
However, there is a group of patients who due to illness
or disability
gets a particularly deteriorated dental health. For that group, we want to supplement the general support with specially targeted efforts.
The social and medical harms of alcohol must be combated.
A reduced alcohol consumption improves health
and reduces many social problems.
Systembolaget must remain state-owned.
The sales monopoly and an active pricing policy are central tools in this work,
but more needs to be done.
Our policy aims at a society free from drugs and doping
and reduced tobacco use.
Children and young people are a particularly important group.
The tax is increased on alcohol and tobacco
in order to reduce their harmful effects.
A national initiative for increased patient safety is being implemented.
The dental care reform is completed
through special efforts to people who due to illness
or disability has a deteriorating dental health.
The ongoing psychiatry effort is made permanent
with the aim of creating the conditions for a long-term development towards a greatly improved psychiatry.
The queue billion is to be further developed
with the aim of creating driving forces and opportunities for the county council to live up to a stricter care guarantee.
An investment is being implemented for a better functioning emergency healthcare
with shorter waiting times.
A patient law
to improve the conditions for fair care is introduced.
The choice of care must be developed
with the goal that all citizens throughout the country should have the opportunity to choose a healthcare provider in primary care.
End-of-life care is improving.
The preventive investment to reduce alcohol consumption,
stop the drugs and doping
and reducing tobacco use will continue during the mandate period.
Everyone has the right to age with dignity.
This does not only mean that the elderly must have a reasonable financial situation
but also that they should feel safe,
community and participation in society.
Older people must be treated with respect.
Their knowledge and competence must be taken advantage of.
Older people are a resource on the labor market
and in our society at large.
Politics needs to break down barriers to the participation of the elderly in community life
and working life.
Discrimination on the basis of age shall not be permitted in any part of society.
To ensure good elderly care and health care
the key is a policy for more people in work.
With people's efforts comes growth
and tax revenue
which secures the general welfare.
Participation,
well-being
and freedom of choice
must be the watchword in the development of elderly policy in the future.
With the Alliance, the welfare policy has taken important steps forward in terms of quality,
freedom of choice
and participation for the individual.
Among other things, a new law on freedom of choice system (LOV) has been introduced.
A municipality can now easily offer opportunities for the citizen to freely choose which home care,
elderly service
and nursing home he or she wants
. Freedom of choice
combined with clear supervision.
Greater resources than ever before have been invested in care
and care for the elderly.
In the future, the stimulus funds to improve care for the elderly in the municipalities must be linked to performance-based targets to a greater extent.
For an elderly person with many different symptoms and diagnoses, the contacts with different principals, businesses and staff categories can be difficult to overview.
Relatives and friends may move in
- a help that not all elderly people have.
We want to invest in getting the care and treatment in the form of home health care,
elderly care,
health center
and hospital care to collaborate in new ways to pool their efforts
around the elderly
for better care.
The quality of care arises in the individual meeting between people.
The employees are the most important resource in elderly care.
There is a great need for both basic and advanced training for elderly care staff
to improve the quality of elderly care.
We therefore propose special training initiatives - a nursing lift - for elderly care employees
as well as investments in increasing geriatric competence
and knowledge about dementia in both healthcare and elderly care.
Specific competence goals for the nursing lift should be drawn up.
Housing for the elderly is an important safety issue.
During the 2000s, the number of special housing has decreased sharply.
The government has therefore invested large resources to increase access to special housing
and in the past year the negative trend has been broken.
Having the opportunity to decide how to live is a central part of the elderly's self-determination.
In the long term, the ambition should be to give the elderly the opportunity to choose for themselves
when it is time to move to adapted accommodation.
We want to continue to contribute to more places in special housing and in safe housing,
but also contribute to the development of other forms of housing for the elderly,
so that more elderly people have the opportunity to choose adapted accommodation.
We also want to make efforts to enable older couples who want to live together, even if their care needs differ.
Elderly people should have the right to, as far as possible, choose how they want to organize their old age in both big and small ways.
The alliance's basic concept is that care for the elderly should be designed with human dignity at the center.
The personal needs of the elderly, the right to be different and make different choices, must therefore be met.
The government has therefore submitted a bill with proposals for a national value base in elderly care
which forms the basis for the local dignity guarantees we want to see put in place in all municipalities.
A guarantee of dignity must contain a concrete description of what older people and their relatives can expect from elderly care in the municipality.
Financial security is important as we get older.
That security is about being able to live on your pension after tax.
The alliance has therefore reduced the tax for Sweden's pensioners in two steps,
above all for those with a low pension.
A third tax relief for pensioners is to be implemented on 1 January 2011.
Our ambition is also that, if the economy allows,
implement further tax cuts for pensioners during the mandate period.
A broad effort is implemented to care
and care
if the sickest elderly should be able to become more cohesive.
A nursing lift for elderly care employees is carried out.
A start-up allowance for elderly care employees is introduced
and a government investment in leadership training for managers in elderly care is implemented.
The current support for the construction of special housing and safe housing is switched over to a broader investment
where funds can also be provided for initiatives for other types of housing for the elderly.
Within the framework of the housing investment, stimulus funds are set aside so that the municipalities can ensure that the elderly couples who want to have the opportunity to live together.
Local dignity guarantees should exist in all the country's municipalities.
An investment is made towards the municipalities to promote the introduction of such guarantees.
An investment is being made for more municipalities to introduce free choice for the elderly in care for the elderly.
No later than 2014, all municipalities in the country should have decided on freedom of choice for the individual according to LOV,
otherwise, mandatory legislation should be considered.
The county councils receive support to introduce a free choice of aids for the elderly and others with disabilities,
which increases the individual's opportunity to receive aids as needed.
The tax for pensioners will be reduced by SEK 2.5 billion at the coming turn of the year, in addition to what was announced in the 2010 spring financial bill.
Altogether, the third step in the pensioner tax cut thus amounts to SEK 7.5 billion in 2011.
The tax for pensioners should be reduced by a further SEK 2.3 billion
when the public finances and the economy so permit.
Few things can be as inhibiting in people's everyday lives as the fear of being exposed to crime.
Being exposed to crime means a violation of life and property
which challenges some of the most fundamental values ​​on which Swedish society rests.
In a safe society, Swedish law applies equally to everyone in Sweden.
A well-functioning justice system
form the core of both a functioning democracy
as a developed welfare society.
We want a society where those who commit crimes are punished
and victims of crime receive redress.
Where crime doesn't pay
and where criminal acts have consequences.
Where fair punishment is imposed so that the victim of the crime receives redress,
but also so that the criminal can atone for his crime and get the opportunity for a new chance.
When someone commits a crime, it is important that the sentence handed down is fair and reasonable both in relation to the act and in relation to other acts.
Whoever repeats the crime will receive a more severe punishment.
The coalition government has tightened the consequences of recidivism in terms of serious violent crimes.
During the coming mandate period, we want to tighten the consequences in the event of recidivism for other crimes as well.
We also want several crimes prosecuted at the same time to result in harsher penalties than today.
Human trafficking is the slavery of our time,
and the majority of those who fall victim to human trafficking are sexually exploited.
Human traffickers exploit vulnerable and poor people from other countries.
In many situations, it appears from the circumstances that the woman who sells her body does so under the exercise of coercion from another person.
The work against human trafficking must also be carried out here in Sweden
by reducing demand.
We want to toughen the punishment for anyone who buys sex from a person who is exposed to human trafficking or is otherwise particularly vulnerable.
A safe society is not only based on how the legislation is designed.
Safety requires people who dare to speak up,
who can distinguish between right and wrong and act accordingly.
Our responsibility both for ourselves and for our fellow human beings is central.
A statutory obligation for everyone to intervene whenever possible when someone is in need - sometimes called a civil courage law - is being investigated.
The family is an important crime prevention resource.
Good conditions for children to grow up in a safe environment,
where they can meet love, understanding, face demands, take responsibility for their actions and learn to respect and care for others
is a fundamental prerequisite for security in society.
Therefore, it is important for society to respond early and clearly to all crimes.
This applies not least to catching young people who are about to end up astray.
Here, increased collaboration is needed between the police,
social services,
school
and parents. A major problem today is that the judicial authorities take far too long to investigate crimes
where young people are involved.
Society cannot afford – neither financially nor humanly – to look away when things go wrong in the lives of young people.
The municipalities' work with young offenders needs to be given a firmer form.
A special committee with broad expertise can be an alternative.
By demanding fast processing by the courts
we want to ensure that young people who commit crimes receive earlier and clearer reactions from society.
Feeling free and safe in everyday life should be a matter of course for everyone.
Women
and children are especially vulnerable.
We must therefore strengthen the protection for women who live with a protected identity,
have a particular focus on violence in close relationships,
sexual offenses and harassment
and make sure to help children who get hurt.
The knowledge of the police,
judiciary
and social services
must be deepened.
The non-profit women's shelters are an important resource in the fight against violence.
The connection between alcohol and violent crime is strong. Efforts to reduce the consumption of alcohol and drugs and to prevent abuse
is an important part of crime prevention
and law enforcement work.
During the past mandate period, the coalition government has made the biggest investment ever in the Swedish justice system.
The number of police officers has increased by over 2,800
and today there are 20,000 police officers who work visibly and in people's everyday lives to increase security.
The goal is to create a safer Sweden for everyone,
regardless of who you are or where you live.
We want to continue this work over the next four years.
During the next term of office, the work of the police and the judiciary needs to be made more efficient
and modernized.
More crimes must be prevented
and more crimes committed must be solved and prosecuted.
The police need to get better at using modern technology and IT support in their work,
partly to become more efficient,
but also to combat the growing crime on the Internet.
The division of Swedish police into 21 county police authorities and a central administrative authority (the National Police Board) poses a risk of coordination problems
and poor resource utilization.
The coalition government has therefore appointed a parliamentary inquiry into the future organization of the police
. We want to clarify the division of responsibilities within the Police
and improve the methods of managing the Police.
The police's ability to cooperate with other authorities, both state and municipal, must be strengthened.
The consequences for recidivism are tightened.
Several crimes prosecuted at the same time should result in harsher penalties than today.
The penalty is tougher for anyone who buys sex from a person who is exposed to human trafficking or is otherwise particularly vulnerable.
The requirements for faster handling of juvenile delinquency by the courts are being tightened.
Investigation times are shortened
where children and young people are victims of crime.
There must be an efficient and modern police force throughout the country.
Protection is strengthened for women who live with a protected identity.
The exit from closed youth care must be improved
and the municipalities' follow-up of what happens to the young person after release is secured.
Resources are provided to strengthen all parts of the justice chain.
The equal worth of all people
and the opportunity for all people to make their own choices are fundamental values ​​for us.
We will not settle for anything less than that applies to everyone.
Women like men.
Regardless of whether we were born in Sweden or have come to Sweden from another part of the world.
Regardless of origin,
growing up,
religion,
disability
or sexual orientation.
The path to an equal Sweden is about treating all people with the same respect based on each individual's circumstances and independent choices.
Ultimately, it's about being respected for who you are.
We cannot afford to lose skills and abilities
in the way that happens in a society where people are not allowed to participate on the same terms.
It lays the foundation for alienation and a feeling of not being needed,
something which, by extension, divides the whole society.
The fight for greater equality
is therefore an important issue of freedom.
It is our belief that an equal Sweden
is a more dynamic and cohesive Sweden.
Every person should have the opportunity to influence decisions concerning their own life.
Discrimination must be fought
and children, young people and adults with disabilities
must be given the conditions for independence and self-determination.
Sweden is a country that has a tradition of openness towards the outside world.
New influences have enriched Sweden culturally,
economically
and knowledge-wise through all time.
At the same time, there are major shortcomings regarding the systems for immigrants' establishment in society.
These are reflected in high unemployment
and social problems in the suburbs of big cities.
We also see them in poor school results
and discrimination in the labor market.
It is poorly functioning systems and structures that have created these problems,
not the people who came here.
Swedish society has been too poor at making use of the knowledge and abilities found in those who have come to our country from other countries.
Unemployment is approximately twice as high and the percentage of employed is approximately ten percentage points lower among foreign-born compared to domestic-born
. The difference in employment between foreign-born and domestic-born women is particularly large.
That we do not better see and make use of those born abroad is a waste of people's abilities and knowledge.
The alliance's new approach to the establishment of new arrivals aims to meet these problems and to make it easier for new arrivals
by putting work
and language skills in the center.
The opportunities to take part in the values ​​that underlie our society must also increase.
However, more efforts need to be made to further strengthen the opportunities for those born abroad
to establish themselves on the labor market earlier.
The establishment is about new arrivals getting a job, that they gain knowledge of Swedish
and about how society works,
that there is a good school for the children
and a home where you feel comfortable and secure.
The starting point for the Alliance in integration policy, as in all other areas, is that people who can should be able to support themselves.
The alliance believes that Sweden should have a humane, legal and orderly migration policy.
Sweden must be a haven for people fleeing persecution and oppression.
The coalition government has widened the opportunities for those who want to come to Sweden to create a better future for themselves through work.
The new rules for labor immigration are a very significant reform
which means that Sweden has taken the lead in the development towards more open borders and increased mobility.
The world's migrants contribute their experiences and knowledge in the recipient countries
but also by maintaining strong ties, sending money to relatives, and possibly returning to their countries of origin.
The alliance wants to review the possibilities of reducing costs for those who want to send money home to their families in the country of origin.
Citizenship has an important practical meaning but also has a great symbolic value.
A Swedish citizenship entails both rights and obligations.
We want to signal the weight and importance of citizenship by confirming this in a ceremony.
In Sweden, equality between women and men has come a long way.
At the same time, much remains to be done so that women and men have the same obvious opportunities to realize their life dreams.
We want women and men to have the same opportunities to live on their salary
make a career
and be active in family life,
develop in the job,
run businesses
and feel safe.
It is a matter of freedom
and justice.
The alliance has implemented a series of reforms to increase gender equality in the labor market.
The employment tax deduction means that women in particular increase their working hours.
The equality bonus encourages parents to take parental leave equally
. Legislation against discrimination has been tightened.
A large number of investments have been made to increase knowledge about and facilitate women's entrepreneurship.
The opportunities for entrepreneurship in several female-dominated industries
has improved through freedom of choice reforms in the welfare area
and tax reduction for household services.
The RUT deduction also provides the opportunity for relief in everyday life
while black jobs have become white
and entrepreneurship in the service sector has increased,
which largely benefited women.
These investments will continue.
The alliance also works actively to increase gender equality
in the case of managerial positions,
representation on state boards and in state-owned companies.
The results show that the policy has been effective.
After we changed the hiring procedure, half of all newly hired heads of authorities during the mandate period have been women.
We intend to continue to be clear that today's situation is not acceptable
and that more women are needed in senior positions.
However, there are still unacceptable differences between men's and women's opportunities in the Swedish labor market.
Women express more often than men that they are forced to accept part-time work
or forced to take greater responsibility for unpaid domestic work
. Women run a higher risk of long-term sickness absence.
The alliance's initiative for enhanced research on women's health is an important and concrete measure to remedy this in the long term.
In addition, women have a shorter time on the labor market.
This is due, among other things, to a lower actual retirement age.
This contributes to women also receiving lower pension income when they get older.
The positive development in terms of women's share of the newly started companies needs to continue.
It must become as natural and attractive for women as for men to be entrepreneurs.
With the employment tax credit
and other reforms particularly benefit wage earners with low incomes,
who are often women.
The possibility of living on one's own salary increases.
As women's working hours and employment rates increase,
increased conditions are also created so that homework can be distributed more equally
and thus important steps can be taken towards a more equal society.
To open public and female-dominated businesses for several different employers
improves women's options in the labor market.
It also provides more career paths for women,
both employees and managers, as well as opportunities for women to create and run businesses within e.g. care and welfare.
Men and women are treated and responded to differently in healthcare.
Women are more often misdiagnosed and wrongly operated on than men.
They often have to wait longer for medical appointments.
They have poorer access to care
and they are also sicker once they receive care.
Increased gender equality
and quality in care and social care is largely a matter of knowledge.
Ill-health among young women is a major problem.
It is about both a deteriorating physical and mental health.
Good access to youth receptions is necessary,
as well as strengthened school health care.
The comprehensive action plan against violence in intimate relationships has meant that that work has been given a clearer focus. This work continues.
The government's investment in gender equality continues.
Equality work in schools,
the efforts against women exposed to violence
and the fight against prostitution are some important elements.
The alliance's family policy is based on the children's opportunity to develop together with their parents.
As the children's family situation looks very different
is it important that family policy is based on the family's own situation.
The children in the center,
freedom of choice,
increased responsibility,
diversity in preschool and childcare
and both parents' responsibilities for the children
are key words that summarize the Alliance's view on family policy.
Sweden has an ambitious family policy.
The goal is to create good and safe growing conditions for children and young people,
conditions for families to spend time together
and to encourage equal families.
All children must have the same rights
and are given the same chances to fully shape their own lives as adults.
The alliance is convinced that the parents themselves make the best decisions about their own everyday life.
The family policy challenges of our time are about creating time for both family life and professional life on equal terms for both men and women,
about giving families the conditions for time together,
and about giving all children financial
and social security
and conditions for a good relationship with both parents.
In addition, the public systems must be designed in such a way that society primarily supports and helps
, not controlling and hindering.
We want to do this by starting from the parents' central importance for the child's safety
as well as the need for increased gender equality
and greater freedom of choice for families.
We are now taking further steps to create more self-determination for families
through support
and by simplifying family policy,
make it more flexible
and useful
for the parents
and not least to strengthen the financial margins for the parents and children who have the lowest financial margins.
The alliance wants parents who are alone in their parenting to be able to hand over part of the parental allowance.
For those who are practically single,
should the possibility of taking part in all parental insurance days also be introduced
. We also want to investigate the possibility for students
to let someone who gives up work take care of the student's sick child by handing over days in the temporary parental allowance.
In addition, we want to test the conditions for providing compensation to the parents if the childcare guarantee is not fulfilled.
Many families with children have a vulnerable financial situation;
this applies not least to many single people with children
. With slightly larger margins, parents' concerns about their own family's situation can be reduced
and the children's safety is strengthened.
The obligation to report the care of a sick child on the same day the child falls ill is removed.
The different treatment of women's pregnancy-related problems in the security systems must be analyzed and deficiencies remedied.
Parents must be able to take parental leave at the same time, with parental allowance, for 30 days during the child's first year of life.
The current 10 father's days remain.
The special allowance for children within the framework of the housing allowance is increased.
The equality bonus is simplified and clarified.
The care allowance is made more flexible
by shortening the grace period.
All parents who separate must be offered a cooperation interview.
Sweden must be a leading country for a good environment
and sustainable development,
both nationally
and internationally.
We see the seriousness and global dimension of environmental problems such as the climate challenge,
decreasing biodiversity,
environmentally hazardous emissions
and threatened seas.
We must act nationally to take our responsibility,
but also understand that global problems require global responses.
The environmental and climate challenges are not only threats,
but can also be used as a lever for growth.
Our development towards a greener economy,
with an increasingly large service sector
and growing companies in environmental technology,
contributes to environmental work in Sweden
and contributes through exports to the global work for the world's environment.
We also have a great political and popular commitment to a better environment.
Dangerous chemicals and toxins need to be removed from our everyday lives
and our environment.
Sweden has successfully banned mercury.
The EU's chemical legislation should be tightened
and the EU should take the lead in banning mercury in products that stepped on the path to an international mercury phase-out.
Sweden must push for a more effective chemicals policy in the EU.
Active Swedish work for non-toxic foods
and foods without health-hazardous additives must be prioritized.
A Swedish action plan to identify,
limit
and phasing out hazardous chemicals is being worked out.
The alliance's climate policy means that Sweden must show leadership both for what we do at home
and internationally.
With national measures
can Sweden lead the way for the transformation that is necessary around the world.
We have greatly raised the ambition to reduce emissions in Sweden
Already by the year 2020, emissions for Sweden must have decreased by 40 percent.
It is the most ambitious goal within the EU.
The climate challenge is global and must therefore be met globally.
With 99.8 percent of carbon dioxide emissions outside Sweden's borders, cross-border cooperation is absolutely crucial to seriously reduce emissions.
An ambitious and binding global climate agreement is therefore required.
The Copenhagen meeting in 2009 was a disappointment.
However, Sweden must continue to push for a climate agreement that meets the goal of limiting the temperature rise to two degrees compared to pre-industrial levels.
The new agreement needs to specify more powerful emission reductions,
include more greenhouse gases
and more countries than the current agreement.
The EU has decided to go from 20 to 30 percent as part of an international agreement.
The EU should develop a plan for how the 30 percent target is to be reached
which applies to all member states.
Sweden must work to ensure that all EU member states introduce a national carbon dioxide tax
by spreading the good Swedish example.
The rich countries need to lead the way.
Sweden and the EU must continue to be pushy
for such a climate agreement.
At the same time, we must seek cooperation both to inspire other countries to cooperate
reduce climate impact
and initiate long-term strategic work
with developing countries
for the transfer of green technology,
investments,
adaptation measures
and protection of forests.
Sweden's climate aid must be developed
and the work on climate-proofing aid continues.
The support for climate investments
and technology transfer to developing countries is expanded.
The rich countries have a special responsibility
to finance adaptation measures
. Special support needs to be given to the developing countries that least of all have caused the problems,
but hit the hardest.
We need countries that take the lead
and shows that it is possible to reduce emissions
while creating good conditions for growth
and welfare.
Only if we take action at home
we become credible as a committed actor in international negotiations.
We have technical know-how
and companies that are used to environmental thinking.
Sweden shows leadership through an ambitious climate
and energy policy
with climate targets that are higher than what follows from international agreements.
These goals must be realized through cost-effective measures to reduce emissions both nationally
and internationally.
Sweden must continue to push for a climate agreement
which meets the goal of limiting the temperature rise to two degrees compared to pre-industrial levels.
Climate investments in other countries are being expanded.
Sweden needs good,
cheap
and climate-friendly energy.
This requires long-term rules of the game for energy production.
The alliance has presented an offensive and ambitious collective climate
and energy policy
which combines ecological sustainability,
competitiveness
and security of supply.
Our goals for 2020 are, in addition to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 40 percent,
that half of the energy production must be renewable,
that we should have 10 percent renewable energy in the transport sector
and that energy use must be made more efficient by 20 percent.
To reduce vulnerability
and increase security of supply
the Alliance wants a third leg to be developed for the electricity supply
and thereby reduce dependence on nuclear power
and hydropower.
To achieve this, cogeneration,
wind power
and other renewable power production
together account for a significant part of electricity production.
Nuclear power results in very low emissions of greenhouse gases
and will be an important part of Swedish electricity production for the foreseeable future.
Therefore, existing reactors must be able to increase their power
and replaced by new ones,
but no government subsidies will be given.
Hydropower will continue to account for a significant part of Swedish electricity production.
Carbon dioxide taxes
and energy taxes remain important policy instruments.
It is important that increased income from climate taxes and fees does not lead to an overall higher tax burden.
During the mandate period, the government has reduced the tax on work
and increased taxes in the environmental area.
In the climate bill, the coalition government has presented a comprehensive strategy for tax changes in the energy and environmental area that will come into force in 2011, 2013 and 2015.
These announced tax changes are fixed.
A control station to analyze energy balance,
costs
and climate impact must be implemented in 2015.
Our assessment is that already taken and decided measures will be enough in the next few years to reach the climate goals.
Therefore, the Alliance believes that the carbon dioxide tax does not need to be increased in the coming term
in addition to the annual adjustment with the consumer price index.
Work on more efficient energy use continues.
All modes of transport, including air
such as shipping,
should bear their costs for carbon dioxide emissions.
The EU has decided that aviation should enter the EU emissions trading system.
We want shipping's emissions to be included in a future international climate regime as well.
A key part of the Alliance's policy to increase the share of renewable electricity production is the increased level of ambition in the electricity certificate system.
A new target of 25 TWh has been set for 2020.
At the same time, it is important to continuously analyze the future cost development for the electricity certificates
and the design of interventions to counteract the risk of possibly greatly increased costs.
The Alliance will, if necessary, take appropriate measures to keep costs down for consumers.
The permit processes for both new energy production
and power grids must continue to be simplified and shortened.
With the Alliance's policy, Sweden will have a surplus of low-carbon electricity.
It will keep Swedish electricity prices down
at the same time as increased export of low-carbon electricity from Sweden to Europe replaces coal power and reduces climate emissions
. We want to create a common Nordic
and European electricity market
where consumers can buy electricity from several producers.
It requires more connections with the outside world.
The coalition government has also set as a long-term priority that by 2030, Sweden should have a vehicle fleet that is independent of fossil fuels.
The alliance's green car premium led to a flying start for green car development
and new environmentally friendly cars are also still tax-exempt for five years.
Further developed financial instruments and other incentives are now required.
Sweden must work for increased requirements
and binding EU regulations for car emissions.
The national environmental car definition must be tightened.
Investments are underway in pilot plants for next-generation biofuels.
Consumers should be stimulated to choose technology-neutral environmental alternatives.
Climate work is often about large global agreements,
but important efforts can also be made at the local level
. Urban planning can facilitate the most environmentally friendly transport options,
such as bicycle
and public transport.
New neighborhoods should be planned for sustainable transport solutions based on modern public transport.
For us, the opportunity for individual people to contribute to a better environment is important;
it should be easy to do right.
Our development towards a greener economy,
with an increasingly large service sector
and growing companies in environmental technology,
reduces emissions nationally
and contributes through exports to reducing emissions globally.
The state investments in environmental technology are further developed.
Sweden is a forerunner for more environmentally friendly construction
and accommodation.
The investment in sustainable cities has contributed to this.
To support the development of next-generation technology,
which is not yet fully competitive,
additional support is needed
and ambitious energy research.
The Swedish environmental car definition is gradually being tightened.
Sweden must work for binding emission requirements for passenger cars in the EU.
A new super environment car premium of SEK 40,000 per car is introduced for the cars that emit the least amount of carbon dioxide.
A national demonstration program for the development of electric cars
and charging hybrids are carried out.
The maximum permitted mixture of ethanol in petrol is increased to 10 percent
and of FAME in diesel to 7 percent.
The proportion of tax-exempt low-alcohol ethanol
and FAME are increased to 6.5 percent and 5 percent respectively.
The government investments in energy research are extended.
Further efforts are being made to stimulate the development of solar cells
and solar heating.
The Sustainable cities initiative continues.
The government efforts for environmentally driven economic development are further developed
and a broad national environmental technology strategy is drawn up.
The incentive with a reduced benefit value for electric cars,
plug-in hybrids
and gas vehicles continue.
Decades of overexploitation have meant that our waters are under severe pressure.
A successful environmental policy
need to protect and preserve the vital ecosystems found in seas, lakes and waterways.
The Baltic Sea is a sensitive inland sea.
To save the Baltic Sea's, and also the North Sea's, marine environment
it is required that all the countries concerned cooperate.
Through cooperation on strengthened preparedness at sea
and reduced eutrophication
contributes to the EU's Baltic Sea strategy
to save the Baltic Sea.
It is crucial for the future of the Baltic Sea
that cooperation within the EU is welcomed and utilized by Sweden.
The Baltic Sea will become a pilot area within the EU,
where the countries agree on a common view on the management of the Baltic Sea's resources.
The coalition government has invested a marine environment billion during the mandate period
This investment continues.
The alliance also wants to introduce financial instruments s
if reduces emissions of phosphorus and nitrogen.
To protect the oceans
more wetlands also need to be created
to contribute to the purification of water
and also to create important species-rich environments.
Too many fish stocks are overfished.
The EU's fisheries policy must change to build on long-term sustainable fish stocks.
It is a prerequisite for also having a sustainable fishing industry
which can contribute to employment
and to keep our coasts alive.
We need to stop illegal bottom trawling in protected environments
through increased control
and tougher sanctions.
Efforts must increase to identify and clean up sources of cadmium and PCBs,
improve maritime safety in the Baltic Sea
and strengthen preparedness for oil spills.
Despite the ban on oil spills, several hundred deliberate and illegal spills take place in the Baltic Sea every year.
We want to see tougher penalties
and clear liability rules for oil spills.
We want to test the possibility of labeling oil with DNA, so that emissions can be traced.
To avoid major environmental disasters, we say no to oil drilling in the Baltic Sea.
The incentives for ships to reduce emissions of nitrogen and sulfur oxides must be developed.
Sweden must push on within the EU
so that the common agricultural policy encourages more environmentally friendly agriculture.
The EU's agricultural budget needs to be focused to a much greater extent on encouraging environmentally friendly agriculture
and environmental prevention
measures that, for example, reduce eutrophication.
The investment in the marine environment continues
by allocating a sea billion for the mandate period 2010-2014.
Well-functioning national parks,
nature reserve
and biotope protection areas
form the basis of the formal protection of valuable natural areas,
and comes together with an increased use of nature conservation agreements
continue to be an important part of Swedish nature conservation.
Additional valuable areas of high quality must be given long-term protection and managed well.
The ambition is to continue to protect different forest types,
from forest near mountains
and old-growth forests
to species-rich broadleaf forest in southern and central Sweden.
The coalition government's decision to transfer 100,000 hectares of productive forest land from Sveaskog to the state
to be used as replacement land
contributes powerfully to us reaching the environmental quality goal Living Forests.
The equal forest policy production
and the environmental goals are fixed.
We therefore want to bring together forestry, nature conservation organizations and research for dialogue with the aim of developing sustainable farming
The work must be done in collaboration with landowners and other stakeholders.
State land must continue to be able to be used in the protection work according to the method used during the mandate period.
Nature close to urban areas is important for biological diversity
and outdoor life.
The investment in local nature conservation efforts must continue.
The Alliance's action program to protect endangered species continues.
Hunting and game management have an important task to fill in the management of our game tribes.
The basis is local commitment and participation.
Hunting must be long-term sustainable based on the resource the game tribes constitute.
Predators have a given place in our nature
and the Alliance wants to continue to develop a local management of the predators
to increase confidence in the predator policy.
Moose management must be simplified
and based on local cooperation.
Additional valuable forest areas,
everything from forest near the mountains
and old-growth forests
to species-rich broadleaf forests in southern and central Sweden, is given long-term protection and is well managed.
Sweden must be a strong voice for peace,
freedom
and reconciliation
- both in Europe
and in the world as a whole.
We must promote democracy,
human rights,
international law
and sustainable development
with the goal of transforming oppression into freedom,
poverty to development
and resource waste to sustainable development.
With a clear and distinct foreign policy, Sweden's voice has gained new power.
We want to continue to strengthen the cooperation and affinity with our Nordics
and Baltic neighbors.
Together, we are the ninth strongest economy in the world.
We face common challenges in terms of both the environment and the environment
as collateral.
The European Union is the most important peace project in our part of the world.
We must not miss the mark when it comes to the crucial importance of European cooperation
also for our own future peace
and welfare.
Therefore, we want Sweden to belong to the core of European cooperation.
We want to continue active Swedish involvement wherever European decisions are made
We strive for broad support in all parts of our society behind a strong European cooperation policy.
In our Europe, decisions must be made as close to the citizens as possible.
We want an open Europe that welcomes new members.
By fulfilling the requirements for membership, they strengthen peace,
the freedom
and reconciliation in our part of the world.
They become part of an open and democratic community
and contributes to Europe's development.
We want to expand the neighborhood policy,
not least the Eastern Partnership.
We want to strengthen the common foreign policy
- and the security policy.
Europe must be a strong force for peace
and a strong voice for freedom in the world.
Sweden must continue to be actively involved in shaping this policy.
Solidarity between the countries of Europe is becoming increasingly important
in the face of new challenges and possible threats.
Cooperation provides security.
Cooperation between European countries
provided stability during the financial crisis.
The financial situation is now better
but challenges remain.
Lack of accountability for public finances threatens recovery in Europe.
Any future Swedish entry into the currency union must be preceded by a referendum
The timing of such a meeting must be decided by the Riksdag.
A referendum should only be carried out after a broad discussion
where pros and cons are re-examined in the light of, among other things, experiences and developments in the countries in and outside the euro cooperation.
We want Sweden to be a strong voice for human rights
and democracy in foreign policy.
Not least the work of acting for opinion-
and freedom of religion needs to be further strengthened.
A better world must be a world that gives women better opportunities.
The fight for greater equality
is one of the most important democratic challenges of our time.
Support for a strong and well-functioning United Nations is a cornerstone of Swedish foreign policy.
The almost universal membership of the UN gives the organization strong legitimacy.
We want both individually
and through the EU
work for a strengthened and reformed UN
which can handle the global challenges of the future.
Sweden must be a driving force in the discussions that are held about the reform of both the Security Council
like the UN in general.
One of the more important issues going forward is to implement the obligation to protect that the UN member states already established in 2005.
The principle of international law means that states are obliged to protect their population
and that the outside world has an obligation to intervene when states fail to fulfill it.
We are convinced that a freer world
also becomes a more peaceful world.
Active work against oppression and for freedom
is also work for peace and reconciliation.
Our Europe must be a hope for freedom for the world's oppressed.
Sweden must be a strong voice in the work for human rights,
for example by, when required, advocating so-called smart sanctions that hit the regime but not the people in authoritarian countries.
We want the new economic cooperation within the G20 to better represent all states, both large and small.
Open societies with open economies provide opportunities not only for the freedom of individuals
but also for more people to leave poverty and underdevelopment.
We want a Europe that stands on the side of globalization
against walls, restrictions and prejudices.
The free trade
and open collaboration must continue to lift people all over the world towards a better future
and create a more sustainable management of resources.
The alliance will continue to pursue an ambitious disarmament policy
We want to continue the work for a world without nuclear weapons.
Reducing and eventually getting rid of so-called tactical nuclear weapons is especially important in our part of Europe as well.
We want to discuss initiatives for openness
and arms control also in Europe.
We must actively oppose further proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
The Internet is an increasingly important part of our world.
Mobile communications have created revolutionary new opportunities.
Our Sweden must be a leading force for freedom as well
on as the security of the network.
Development policy must fight poverty
and promote freedom,
democracy,
human rights
and environmentally,
social
and economically sustainable development in the partner countries.
We want to create a generous, efficient and transparent aid.
The alliance has concentrated Sweden's bilateral development cooperation
- from around 70 partner countries to around 30.
This has created the conditions for more focused efforts
which is characterized by quality and measurable results.
Clear thematic priorities in support of democracy
and human rights,
environment and climate,
and gender equality
and women's role in development has been established.
Each year during the mandate period, aid has amounted to 1 percent of GNI.
During the next mandate period, we want to further intensify our work so that Sweden can better contribute to the achievement of the Millennium Goals in 2015
The work for a secure food supply for all people
and efforts to combat hunger must remain high on the development agenda.
Efforts for children
and women's health and development must be strengthened.
Sweden must continue to have an ambitious development policy
and generous assistance.
The reform of aid must continue,
to enable a gathering of power, above all for the world's poorest.
We should also increase efficiency
and the transparency
and increase the focus within multilateral aid.
This part of the aid is evaluated based on the overall objectives of the aid.
A good collaboration should take place between the efforts made in the field of aid
and our peacemaking and peacekeeping international efforts,
not least in Afghanistan,
but it is important to maintain an appropriate division between security promotion efforts
and development cooperation,
so that the civilians
and military roles are kept separate.
Civil society organizations have an important role to play in aid.
This role must be further clarified.
In 2011, the Alliance maintains a focus on the poorest countries and people,
especially in Africa.
The thematic priorities climate,
equality
and democracy
human rights are established and strengthened.
Special new investments are being made to reduce child mortality,
youth employment,
strengthened food safety
and research into the diseases of poverty,
to strengthen the Swedish contribution to the Millennium Goals.
Support via civil society organisations
and humanitarian efforts to assist the poor in the world's crises are prioritized
within the framework of the growing space in the aid budget for 2011.
A policy for global development
developed at EU level to prevent the EU from acting in a way that opposes development
EU member states must take responsibility for reaching the Millennium Goals
and live up to their commitments.
A contract is created between the state and interested organizations
to mark and clarify the role of the individual organizations in the development work.
The aid for 2011 amounts to SEK 35 billion, which corresponds to one percent of GNI.
An investment is carried out for the world's children and young people,
with a focus, among other things, on children's health
and education
and youth employment
and entrepreneurship.
Support for humanitarian efforts to assist the poor in the world's crises is increasing.
The grant to civil society organizations for aid efforts is increasing,
among other things as part of the targeted investment in children and young people.
Sweden must have an available,
useful
and flexible defense
as individual
and together with others can secure our country's freedom and independence.
The strength of the defense must develop in step with the demands made in the form of the situation in our surrounding world
and the nature and extent of the international missions that Sweden undertakes,
within the framework of the European Union
and the efforts of the international community
for peace
and stability in the world.
To achieve this, the Alliance has implemented one of the most comprehensive defense reforms ever,
which increases the country's defense capability by creating a defense force with greatly increased availability
and usability.
A new regional perspective has been added to defense policy.
A response organization with standing and contracted units is created
for operations in the country,
in the immediate area
and internationally.
The new response organization of around 50,000 people should be in place during 2014.
The Home Guard develops into national protection forces.
They have a central role in the Swedish defence
– their role and ability will increase.
The armed forces' personnel supply will be based on voluntary recruitment
and made gender neutral.
The Conscription Act is not applied unless defense readiness so requires.
To increase usability
and the flexibility
resources are transferred from support and peripheral activities to association activities.
The development of the response organization takes place at the rate that rationalizations free up resources.
A unified policy is put in place to support officers, soldiers and sailors before, during and after deployment.
The future development of the defense will be decided in the next orientation decision, which applies to the period after 2015.
The Defense Committee is given a new assignment that applies to the period after 2015.
Before the defense decision, future needs will be weighed and the demands made by developments in our surrounding world will be studied.
The environmental analysis must take particular account of the dynamics in our immediate area
and Russia.
Sweden has a responsibility to contribute to peace,
security
and stability in our environment.
It is a matter of international solidarity
and to support vulnerable people.
During the mandate period, the alliance has doubled Sweden's ability to carry out international operations with military personnel.
Civil operations have also been strengthened.
Through our participation in the Nordic Battle Group (NBG), one of the EU's two rapid response forces
, Sweden takes responsibility for peace
and security
in and outside our immediate area.
Sweden participates with peacekeeping forces in Afghanistan at the invitation of the Afghan government
, together with over 40 countries and with a mandate from the UN.
Leaving Afghanistan before the country can take responsibility for security with its own resources would lead to a greatly deteriorated security situation,
with the risk of new conflicts that could quickly spread.
That would put the civilian efforts in Afghanistan at risk.
The Swedish commitment is long-term and broad,
and is about both aid,
efforts for democracy
and human rights
as if military presence.
The whole is important to make a difference.
In Afghanistan, as in other conflict areas, women's vulnerability is particularly great
and their participation extra necessary to create long-term peace.
Sweden must support national
and local organizations, actors
as well as measures and initiatives that work to implement UN Resolution 1325
about women's participation in all phases of conflict resolution.
The transition to the new defense is a high priority during the next mandate period.
Sweden will lead NBG 2011
and must have the ambition to also undertake the leadership of NBG 2014.
Our involvement in Afghanistan must be long-term.
We want to increase civilian efforts in Afghanistan.
An open and tolerant society is built on clear values,
where we distinguish right from wrong,
shows tolerance for differences
and gives room for people to grow
and stands up for those who are vulnerable and in need.
The strength of these good values ​​does not arise in a vacuum. Community building is carried out every day by the people who participate in and make up civil society,
with its wide spectrum of voluntary and non-profit associations and activities.
In addition, association life is a meeting place where contacts are promoted
and trust is created,
which is one of the foundations of prosperity in society.
Thanks to the freedom and self-worth of civil society, this tradition has a strong position and great importance in society.
The alliance wants to see continued encouragement of the non-profit forces in civil society
as the basis for our open and tolerant democracy.
Society is bigger than the state.
Associations, sports clubs, aid organisations, socially engaged associations and faith communities belong to civil society
and must be allowed to develop in freedom without government control
and in accordance with its peculiarity.
The public sector must complement rather than compete with the non-profit sector
and strive to simplify for engagement.
The public sector must also encourage,
cooperate with
and take advantage of, for example, the social work that many associations and communities carry out both within
as outside the country's borders.
To strengthen civil society
and to encourage citizen engagement
the right to deduct for gifts to non-profit organizations must be introduced.
The right to deduct will mainly affect aid organisations.
A right of deduction is introduced for gifts to certain non-profit organisations.
The culture must be a dynamic,
challenging
and unbound power
with freedom of expression as a basis.
Culture gives us a historical anchoring
and tools to face life's difficult questions
and moral considerations.
Based on the freedom of culture
and intrinsic value
the Alliance wants to strengthen the cultural
and the importance of creativity in society.
The non-profit forces that support cultural life around the country
is of great importance to the culture.
All people regardless of background
and conditions
should be able to share in the possibilities of culture and creation.
A lively cultural life is also characterized by a lively amateur culture
as a professional cultural creation
throughout the country.
Young children often have a natural attitude towards culture and creativity.
This natural desire to create must be harnessed and strengthened.
Children's and young people's access to creativity is therefore a special responsibility for cultural policy.
A priority for the Alliance is to increase reading.
A broad book investigation is added.
Cultural policy has a special responsibility for children's and young people's right to culture.
Artists and cultural creators must have justice
and appropriate conditions
which takes into account their special working conditions
and life situation.
Cultural and creative industries are developing rapidly and are becoming increasingly important.
We all bear a responsibility to secure our shared memories.
A special responsibility lies with our cultural heritage-bearing institutions,
the archives,
the libraries
and the museums.
The voluntary efforts that are made,
for example by the Homeland Movement in projects such as House with history, is of central importance for the care of cultural heritage.
The ecclesiastical cultural heritage forms an essential part of our common history with significance for all citizens.
Long-term and clear terms
is a prerequisite for functioning cultural heritage work.
Creative school is expanded to cover the entire primary school.
Resources are invested in renovating the Opera
and rebuild the National Museum.
Resources are provided to digitize cinemas.
Sport is our biggest popular movement.
Over 20,000 associations are connected to the National Sports Confederation and together they gather more than 3.5 million members.
We want a sports policy that aims to create opportunities for more people to exercise and play sports
to promote good public health.
The alliance's sports policy emphasizes the children's perspective
and will build on the Swedish model
with an independent sports movement.
The alliance has taken the initiative for the "Sports lift" initiative,
which means that 500 million kroner per year has been added to Swedish sports
to open the doors to sports for more children and young people
and make them want to continue playing sports later in life.
People with disabilities must be given improved opportunities to play sports.
By largely replacing the sport's contribution from AB Svenska Spel, with fixed funding from the state budget,
has the Alliance met the sport's desire for a stable and long-term funding system.
The sports movement is therefore not dependent on temporary ups and downs in Svenska Spel's profits.
Within the framework of the increased state grant, which now amounts to just over SEK 1.2 billion
, increased investments in sports' anti-doping activities, among other things, are made possible,
sports research
as well as building a national competence center for international sporting events.
SEK 500 million per year is given to Swedish sports.
